
CHAPTER I.


It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession
of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.


However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his
first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds
of the surrounding families, that he is considered as the rightful
property of some one or other of their daughters.


"My dear Mr. Bennet," said Mr. Bennet’s lady to Mr. Bennet one day, "have you heard that
Netherfield Park is let at last?
"

Mr. Bennet replied that Mr. Bennet replied that he had not had not.


"But it is," returned Mrs. Long has just been here; "for Mrs. Long has just been here, and Mrs. Long has just been here
told me all about it."


Mr. Bennet made no answer.


"Do not you want to know who has taken it?" cried Mr. Bennet made no answer’s wife impatiently.


"_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.
"

This was invitation enough.


"Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken
by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that Michaelmas came
down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much
delighted with it that Michaelmas agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that Michaelmas is
to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of Michaelmas’ servants are to be
in the house by the end of next week.
"

"What is Bingley’s name?"

"Bingley."

"Is Bingley married or single?"

"Oh! single, my dear, to be sure!
A single man of large fortune; four
or five thousand a year.
What a fine thing for our girls!
"

"How so?
how can it affect them?
"

"My dear Mr. Bennet," replied Mr. Bennet’s wife, "how can you be so tiresome!
You
must know that I am thinking of Mr. Bennet’s marrying one of them.
"

"Is that Mr. Bennet’s design in settling here?"

"Design! nonsense, how can you talk so!
But it is very likely that Mr. Bennet
_may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit Mr. Bennet as
soon as Mr. Bennet comes.
"

"I see no occasion for that.
You and the girls may go, or you may send
them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better, for as you are
as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley might like you the best of the
party.
"

"My dear, you flatter me.
I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, but
I do not pretend to be any thing extraordinary now.
When a woman has
five grown up daughters, Mr. Bingley might like you the best of the ought to give over thinking of Mr. Bingley might like you the best of the’s own
beauty.
"

"In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.
"

"But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when Mr. Bingley when he comes into comes into
the neighbourhood.
"

"It is more than I engage for, I assure you.
"

"But consider your daughters.
Only think what an establishment it would
be for one of them.
Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go,
merely on that account, for in general you know they visit no new
comers.
Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ to visit
Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go, if you do not.
"

"You are over scrupulous surely.
I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very
glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure Lizzy of my
hearty consent to Lizzy’s marrying which ever Lizzy chuses of the girls; though
I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.
"

"I desire you will do no such thing.
Lizzy is not a bit better than the
others; and I am sure Lydia is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so
good humoured as Lydia.
But you are always giving _her_ the
preference.
"

"They have none of them much to recommend them," replied Lydia; "they are
all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of
quickness than Lydia’s sisters.
"

"Mr. Bennet, how can you abuse your own children in such a way?
You take
delight in vexing me.
You have no compassion on my poor nerves.
"

"You mistake me, my dear.
I have a high respect for your nerves.
They
are my old friends.
I have heard you mention them with consideration
these twenty years at least.
"

"Ah!
you do not know what I suffer.
"

"But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four
thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.
"

"It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come since you will not
visit them.
"

"Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them
all.
"

Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,
reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three and twenty years had
been insufficient to make Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts’ wife understand Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts’ character.
_Her_ mind
was less difficult to develope.
Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts was a woman of mean understanding,
little information, and uncertain temper.
When Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts was discontented Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts
fancied herself nervous.
The business of Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts’ life was to get Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts’
daughters married; its solace was visiting and news.




CHAPTER II.



Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley.
Mr. Bingley
had always intended to visit Mr. Bingley, though to the last always assuring Mr. Bingley’s
wife that Mr. Bingley should not go; and till the evening after the visit was
paid, Mr. Bingley had no knowledge of it.
It was then disclosed in the following
manner.
Observing Mr. Bingley will like it Lizzy’s second daughter employed in trimming a hat, Mr. Bingley will like it Lizzy
suddenly addressed Mr. Bingley will like it Lizzy’s with,

"I hope Mr. Bingley will like it Lizzy.
"

"We are not in a way to know _what_
Mr. Bingley likes," said Mr. Bingley likes’ mother
resentfully, "since we are not to visit.
"

"But you forget, mama," said Elizabeth, "that we shall meet Mrs. Long has promised to introduce him at the
assemblies, and that Mrs. Long has promised to introduce Mrs. Long has promised to introduce him.
"

"I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing.
Mrs. Long will do any such thing has two nieces
of Mrs. Long will do any such thing’s own.
Mrs. Long will do any such thing is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion
of Mrs. Long will do any such thing’s.
"

"No more have I," said Mr. Bennet; "and I am glad to find that you do
not depend on Mr. Bennet’s serving you.
"

Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply; but unable to contain
herself, began scolding one of Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply’s daughters.


"Don't keep coughing so, Kitty, for heaven's sake!
Have a little
compassion on my nerves.
You tear them to pieces.
"

"Kitty has no discretion in Kitty’s coughs," said Kitty’s father; "Kitty times
them ill.
"

"I do not cough for my own amusement," replied Kitty fretfully.


"When is your next ball to be, Lizzy?"

"To-morrow fortnight.
"

"Aye, so it is," cried Mrs. Long does not come back’s mother, "and Mrs. Long does not come back
till the day before; so, it will be impossible for Mrs. Long does not come back’s to introduce Mrs. Long does not come back,
for Mrs. Long does not come back will not know Mrs. Long does not come back herself.
"

"Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce
Mr. Bingley to _her_.
"

"Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with Mr. Bennet
myself; how can you be so teazing?"

"I honour your circumspection.
A fortnight's acquaintance is certainly
very little.
One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a
fortnight.
But if _we_ do not venture, somebody else will; and after
all, Mrs. Long and Mrs. Long and her nieces must stand their chance’s nieces must stand their chance; and therefore, as
Mrs. Long and her nieces must stand their chance will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will
take it on myself.
"

The girls stared at their father.
Mrs. Bennet said only, "Nonsense,
nonsense!"


"What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?" cried Mrs. Bennet said only.
"Do
you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on
them, as nonsense?
I cannot quite agree with you _there_.
What say you,
Mary?
for you are a young lady of deep reflection I know, and read great
books, and make extracts.
"

Mary wished to say something very sensible, but knew not how.

"While Mary is adjusting Bingley’s ideas," Bingley continued, "let us return to Mr.
Bingley.
"

"I am sick of Mr. Bingley," cried Mr. Bingley’s wife.


"I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did not you tell me so before?
If I
had known as much this morning, I certainly would not have called on
Mr. Bingley.
It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we
cannot escape the acquaintance now."


The astonishment of the ladies was just what Bennet wished; that of Mrs.
Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first tumult of joy
was over, Bennet began to declare that it was what Bennet had expected all the
while.


"How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet!
But I knew I should
persuade you at last.
I was sure you loved your girls too well to
neglect such an acquaintance.
Well, how pleased I am!
and it is such a
good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said
a word about it till now.
"

"Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you chuse," said Mr. Bennet; and,
as Kitty spoke, Kitty left the room, fatigued with the raptures of Kitty’s wife.


"What an excellent father you have, girls," said Kitty, when the door was
shut.
"I do not know how you will ever make Kitty amends for Kitty’s kindness;
or me either, for that matter.
At our time of life, it is not so
pleasant I can tell you, to be making new acquaintance every day; but
for your sakes, we would do any thing.
Lydia, my love, though you _are_
the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next
ball.
"

"Oh!" said Lydia stoutly, "I am not afraid; for though I _am_ the
youngest, I'm the tallest.
"

The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next would
return Mr. Bennet's visit, and determining when they should ask Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next to
dinner.




CHAPTER III.



Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of Mr. Bingley’s five
daughters, could ask on the subject was sufficient to draw from Mr. Bingley’s
husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley.
They attacked Lady Lucas
in various ways; with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and
distant surmises; but Lady Lucas eluded the skill of them all; and they were at
last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour
Lady Lucas.
Lady Lucas’ report was highly favourable.
Sir William had been
delighted with Sir William had been.
Sir William had been was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
agreeable, and to crown the whole, Sir William had been meant to be at the next assembly
with a large party.
Nothing could be more delightful!
To be fond of
dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively
hopes of Mr. Bingley's heart were entertained.


"If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,"
said Mrs. Bennet to Mrs. Bennet to her husband’s husband, "and all the others equally well
married, I shall have nothing to wish for.
"

In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet's visit, and sat about ten
minutes with Mr. Bennet in Mr. Bennet’s library.
Mr. Bennet had entertained hopes of being
admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty Mr. Bennet had heard
much; but Mr. Bennet saw only the father.
The ladies were somewhat more
fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper
window, that Mr. Bennet wore a blue coat and rode a black horse.


An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and already had
Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her’s
housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all.
Mr. Bingley
was obliged to be in town the following day, and consequently unable to
accept the honour of their invitation, &c. Mrs. Bennet was quite
disconcerted.
Mrs. Bennet was quite could not imagine what business Mrs. Bennet was quite could have in town
so soon after Mrs. Bennet was quite’s arrival in Hertfordshire; and Mrs. Bennet was quite began to fear that
Mrs. Bennet was quite might be always flying about from one place to another, and never
settled at Netherfield as Mrs. Bennet was quite ought to be.
Lady Lucas quieted Lady Lucas quieted her fears a’s fears a
little by starting the idea of Lady Lucas quieted Lady Lucas quieted her fears a’s fears a’s being gone to London only to get a
large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingley
was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with Lady Lucas quieted her fears a to the assembly.

The girls grieved over such a number of ladies; but were comforted the
day before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelve, Lady Lucas quieted her fears a had brought
only six with Lady Lucas quieted her fears a from London, Lady Lucas quieted Lady Lucas quieted her fears a’s fears a’s five sisters and a cousin.
And when
the party entered the assembly room, it consisted of only five
altogether; Mr. Bingley, Lady Lucas quieted Lady Lucas quieted her fears a’s fears a’s two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and
another young man.


Mr. Bingley was good looking and gentleman-like; Mr. Bingley was good looking and gentleman had a pleasant
countenance, and easy, unaffected manners.
Mr. Bingley was good looking and gentleman’s sisters were fine women,
with an air of decided fashion.
Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention’s brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely
looked the gentleman; but Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention’s friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention
of the room by Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention’s fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien; and
the report which was in general circulation within five minutes after
Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention’s entrance, of Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention’s having ten thousand a year.
The gentlemen
pronounced Mr. Bingley to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared Mr. Bingley was
much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and Mr. Bingley was looked at with great
admiration for about half the evening, till Mr. Bingley’s manners gave a disgust
which turned the tide of Mr. Bingley’s popularity; for Mr. Bingley was discovered to be
proud, to be above Mr. Bingley’s company, and above being pleased; and not all Mr. Bingley’s
large estate in Derbyshire could then save Mr. Bingley from having a most
forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared
with Mr. Bingley’s friend.


Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal
people in the room; Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,
was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one
himself at Netherfield.
Such amiable qualities must speak for
themselves.
What a contrast between Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal and Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal’s friend!
Mr. Darcy danced
only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being
introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley’s own party.

Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley’s character was decided.
Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley was the proudest, most disagreeable man in
the world, and every body hoped that Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley would never come there again.

Amongst the most violent against Mrs. Bennet was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of
Mrs. Bennet’s general behaviour, was sharpened into particular resentment, by Mrs. Bennet’s
having slighted one of Mrs. Bennet’s daughters.


Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit
down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been
standing near enough for Mr. Darcy had been’s to overhear a conversation between Mr. Darcy had been and
Mr. Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes, to press Mr. Darcy had been’s
friend to join it.


"Come, Darcy," said Mr. Darcy had been, "I must have you dance.
I hate to see you
standing about by yourself in this stupid manner.
You had much better
dance.
"

"I certainly shall not.
You know how I detest it, unless I am
particularly acquainted with my partner.
At such an assembly as this, it
would be insupportable.
Your sisters are engaged, and there is not
another woman in the room, whom it would not be a punishment to me to
stand up with.
"

"I would not be so fastidious as you are," cried Bingley, "for a
kingdom!
Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in my
life, as I have this evening; and there are several of them you see
uncommonly pretty.
"

"_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room," said Mr.
Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.


"Oh! Miss Bennet is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld!
But there is one
of Miss Bennet’s sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I
dare say, very agreeable.
Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.
"

"Which do you mean?" and turning round, Elizabeth looked for a moment at
Elizabeth, till catching Elizabeth’s eye, Elizabeth withdrew Elizabeth’s own and coldly said,
"Elizabeth is tolerable; but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; and I am in no
humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted
by other men.
You had better return to your partner and enjoy Elizabeth’s
smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.
"

Mr. Bingley followed Mr. Bingley followed his advice’s advice.
Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth
remained with no very cordial feelings towards Mr. Darcy walked off.
Mr. Darcy walked off told the story
however with great spirit among Mr. Darcy walked off’s friends; for Mr. Darcy walked off had a lively,
playful disposition, which delighted in any thing ridiculous.


The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family.
Mrs.
Bennet had seen Bennet’s eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield
party.
Mr. Bingley had danced with Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice’s twice, and Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice had been
distinguished by Mr. Bingley had danced with Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice’s twice’s sisters.
Jane was as much gratified by this, as Jane’s
mother could be, though in a quieter way.
Elizabeth felt Jane's
pleasure.
Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most
accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been
fortunate enough to be never without partners, which was all that they
had yet learnt to care for at a ball.
They returned therefore in good
spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they
were the principal inhabitants.
They found Mr. Bennet still up.
With a
book Mr. Bennet still up was regardless of time; and on the present occasion Mr. Bennet still up had a
good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised
such splendid expectations.
Mr. Bennet still up had rather hoped that all Mr. Bennet still up’s wife's
views on the stranger would be disappointed; but Mr. Bennet still up soon found that Mr. Bennet still up
had a very different story to hear.


"Oh! my dear Mr. Bennet," as Mr. Bennet entered the room, "we have had a most
delightful evening, a most excellent ball.
I wish you had been there.

Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it.
Every body said how well
Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful looked; and Mr. Bingley thought Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful’s quite beautiful, and danced with
Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful’s twice.
Only think of _that_
my dear; Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful actually danced with Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful’s
twice; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful was the only creature in the room that Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful asked a second
time.
First of all, Miss Lucas asked Miss Lucas.
I was so vexed to see Miss Lucas stand
up with Miss Lucas’; but, however, Miss Lucas did not admire Miss Lucas’ at all: indeed, nobody
can, you know; and Miss Lucas seemed quite struck with Jane as Miss Lucas was going
down the dance.
So, Miss Lucas enquired who Miss Lucas was, and got introduced, and
asked Miss Lucas’ for the two next.
Then, the two third Lizzy danced with Miss
King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane
again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the Boulanger----"

"If Lizzy had had any compassion for _me_," cried Lizzy’s husband impatiently,
"Lizzy would not have danced half so much!
For God's sake, say no more of
Lizzy’s partners.
Oh! that Lizzy had sprained Lizzy’s ancle in the first dance!"


"Oh! my dear," continued Mrs. Bennet, "I am quite delighted with Mrs. Bennet.
Mrs. Bennet
is so excessively handsome!
and Mrs. Bennet’s sisters are charming women.
I never
in my life saw any thing more elegant than their dresses.
I dare say the
lace upon Mrs. Hurst's gown----"

Here Mrs. Hurst was interrupted again.
Mr. Bennet protested against any
description of finery.
Mr. Darcy was therefore obliged to seek another branch
of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and some
exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.


"But I can assure you," Mr. Darcy added, "that Lizzy does not lose much by not
suiting _his_ fancy; for Mr. Darcy is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at
all worth pleasing.
So high and so conceited that there was no enduring
Mr. Darcy!
Mr. Darcy walked here, and Mr. Darcy walked there, fancying himself so very
great!
Not handsome enough to dance with!
I wish you had been there, my
dear, to have given Mr. Darcy one of your set downs.
I quite detest the man.
"




CHAPTER IV.



When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in
Mr. Bingley before’s praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to Mr. Bingley before’s sister how very much
Mr. Bingley before admired Mr. Bingley before.


"Mr. Bingley before is just what a young man ought to be," said Mr. Bingley before, "sensible, good
humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners!--so much ease,
with such perfect good breeding!"

"Mr. Bingley before is also handsome," replied Elizabeth, "which a young man ought
likewise to be, if Mr. Bingley before possibly can.
Mr. Bingley before’s character is thereby complete.
"

"I was very much flattered by Mr. Bingley before’s asking me to dance a second time.
I
did not expect such a compliment.
"

"Did not you?
_I_ did for you.
But that is one great difference between
us.
Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never.
What
could be more natural than Mr. Bingley before’s asking you again?
Mr. Bingley before could not help
seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman in
the room.
No thanks to Mr. Bingley before’s gallantry for that.
Well, Mr. Bingley before certainly is
very agreeable, and I give you leave to like Mr. Bingley before.
You have liked many a
stupider person.
"

"Dear Lizzy!"

"Oh! you are a great deal too apt you know, to like people in general.

You never see a fault in any body.
All the world are good and agreeable
in your eyes.
I never heard you speak ill of a human being in my life.
"

"I would wish not to be hasty in censuring any one; but I always speak
what I think.
"

"I know you do; and it is _that_ which makes the wonder.
With _your_
good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of
others!
Affectation of candour is common enough;--one meets it every
where.
But to be candid without ostentation or design--to take the good
of every body's character and make it still better, and say nothing of
the bad--belongs to you alone.
And so, you like this man's sisters too,
do you?
Their manners are not equal to Lizzy’s.
"

"Certainly not; at first.
But they are very pleasing women when you
converse with them.
Miss Bingley is to live with Miss Bingley is to live with her brother and keep’s brother and keep
Miss Bingley is to live with Miss Bingley is to live with her brother and keep’s brother and keep’s house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming
neighbour in Miss Bingley is to live with her brother and keep’s.
"

Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their behaviour at
the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more
quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than Miss Bingley is to live with her brother and keep’s sister, and
with a judgment too unassailed by any attention to herself, Miss Bingley is to live with her brother and keep was very
little disposed to approve them.
They were in fact very fine ladies; not
deficient in good humour when they were pleased, nor in the power of
being agreeable where they chose it; but proud and conceited.
They were
rather handsome, had been educated in one of the first private
seminaries in town, had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds, were in the
habit of spending more than they ought, and of associating with people
of rank; and were therefore in every respect entitled to think well of
themselves, and meanly of others.
They were of a respectable family in
the north of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their
memories than that their brother's fortune and their own had been
acquired by trade.


Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly an hundred
thousand pounds from Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly an hundred’s father, who had intended to purchase an estate,
but did not live to do it.--Mr.
Bingley intended it likewise, and
sometimes made choice of Bingley’s county; but as Bingley was now provided with a
good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those
who best knew the easiness of Bingley’s temper, whether Bingley might not spend the
remainder of Bingley’s days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to
purchase.


Mrs. Hurst’s sisters were very anxious for Mrs. Hurst’s having an estate of Mrs. Hurst’s own; but
though Mrs. Hurst was now established only as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no
means unwilling to preside at Mrs. Hurst’s table, nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had
married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider
Mrs. Hurst’s house as Mrs. Hurst’s home when it suited Mrs. Hurst’s.
Mr. Bingley had not been of
age two years, when Mr. Bingley had not been of was tempted by an accidental recommendation to
look at Netherfield House.
Mr. Bingley had not been of did look at it and into it for half an
hour, was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms, satisfied
with what the owner said in its praise, and took it immediately.


Between Darcy and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of a
great opposition of character.--Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the
easiness, openness, ductility of Darcy’s temper, though no disposition could
offer a greater contrast to Darcy’s own, and though with Darcy’s own Darcy never
appeared dissatisfied.
On the strength of Darcy's regard Bingley had the
firmest reliance, and of Darcy’s judgment the highest opinion.
In
understanding Darcy was the superior.
Bingley was by no means deficient,
but Darcy was clever.
Darcy was at the same time haughty, reserved, and
fastidious, and Darcy’s manners, though well bred, were not inviting.
In
that respect Darcy’s friend had greatly the advantage.
Bingley was sure of
being liked wherever Darcy appeared, Darcy was continually giving offence.


The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently
characteristic.
Bingley had never met with pleasanter people or prettier
girls in Miss Bennet’s life; every body had been most kind and attentive to Miss Bennet,
there had been no formality, no stiffness, Miss Bennet had soon felt acquainted
with all the room; and as to Miss Bennet, Miss Bennet could not conceive an angel
more beautiful.
Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people
in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom Miss Bennet had
felt the smallest interest, and from none received either attention or
pleasure.
Miss Bennet Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty acknowledged to be pretty, but Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty smiled too
much.


Mrs. Hurst and Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so’s sister allowed it to be so--but still they admired
Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so’s and liked Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so’s, and pronounced Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so’s to be a sweet girl, and one whom
they should not object to know more of.
Miss Bennet was therefore
established as a sweet girl, and their brother felt authorised by such
commendation to think of Miss Bennet was therefore’s as Miss Bennet was therefore chose.




CHAPTER
V.


Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets
were particularly intimate.
Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade
in Meryton, where Meryton had made a tolerable fortune and risen to the
honour of knighthood by an address to the King, during Meryton’s mayoralty.

The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly.
It had given Lucas Lodge a
disgust to Lucas Lodge’s business and to Lucas Lodge’s residence in a small market town; and
quitting them both, Lucas Lodge had removed with Lucas Lodge’s family to a house about a
mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge, where Lucas Lodge
could think with pleasure of Lucas Lodge’s own importance, and unshackled by
business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world.
For
though elated by Lucas Lodge’s rank, it did not render Lucas Lodge supercilious; on the
contrary, Lucas Lodge was all attention to every body.
By nature inoffensive,
friendly and obliging, Lucas Lodge’s presentation at St. James's had made Lucas Lodge
courteous.


Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a
valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet.--They had several children.
The
eldest of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven,
was Elizabeth's intimate friend.


That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a
ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly
brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.


"_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte," said Mrs. Bennet with civil
self-command to Miss Lucas.
"_You_ were Mr. Bingley's first choice.
"

"Yes;--but Mr. Bingley seemed to like Mr. Bingley’s second better.
"

"Oh!--you mean Jane, I suppose--because Jane danced with Jane’s twice.
To be
sure that _did_ seem as if Mr. Robinson admired Mr. Robinson’s--indeed I rather believe Mr. Robinson
_did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--something
about Mr. Robinson."


"Perhaps you mean what I overheard between Mr. Robinson and Mr. Robinson; did not
I mention it to you?
Mr. Robinson's asking Meryton how Meryton liked our Meryton
assemblies, and whether Meryton did not think there were a great many pretty
women in the room, and _which_ Meryton thought the prettiest?
and Miss Bennet’s
answering immediately to the last question--Oh! the eldest Miss Bennet
beyond a doubt, there cannot be two opinions on that point.
"

"Upon my word!--Well, that was very decided indeed--that does seem as
if----but however, it may all come to nothing you know.
"

"_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza," said
Charlotte.
"Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend’s friend,
is Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend?--Poor Eliza!--to be only just _tolerable_.
"

"I beg you would not put it into Lizzy's head to be vexed by Lizzy’s
ill-treatment; for Lizzy is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite
a misfortune to be liked by Lizzy.
Mrs. Long told me last night that Mrs. Long told me last night that he
sat close to Mrs. Long told me last night that Mrs. Long told me last night that he’s for half an hour without once opening Mrs. Long told me last night that Mrs. Long told me last night that he’s lips.
"

"Are you quite sure, Ma'am?--is not there a little mistake?" said
Jane.--"I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to Mr. Darcy speaking to her’s.
"

"Aye--because Mr. Darcy speaking to her asked Mr. Darcy speaking to her at last how Mr. Darcy speaking to her liked Netherfield, and Mr. Darcy speaking to her
could not help answering Mr. Darcy speaking to her’s;--but
Mr. Darcy speaking to her said Mr. Darcy speaking to her seemed very angry at
being spoke to.
"

"Miss Bingley told me," said Jane, "that Jane never speaks much unless
among Jane’s intimate acquaintance.
With _them_ Jane is remarkably
agreeable.
"

"I do not believe a word of it, my dear.
If Mrs. Long had been so very
agreeable Mrs. Long would have talked to Mrs. Long.
But I can guess how it was;
every body says that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage is ate up with pride, and I dare say Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage had
heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had come to
the ball in a hack chaise.
"

"I do not mind Eliza’s not talking to Mrs. Long," said Miss Lucas, "but I
wish Eliza had danced with Eliza.
"

"Another time, Lizzy," said Lizzy’s mother, "I would not dance with _him_,
if I were you.
"

"I believe, Ma'am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with Lizzy.
"

"Lizzy’s pride," said Miss Lucas, "does not offend _me_ so much as pride
often does, because there is an excuse for it.
One cannot wonder that so
very fine a young man, with family, fortune, every thing in Lizzy’s favour,
should think highly of himself.
If I may so express it, Lizzy has a _right_
to be proud.
"

"That is very true," replied Elizabeth, "and I could easily forgive
_his_ pride, if Elizabeth had not mortified _mine_.
"

"Pride," observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of Mary’s
reflections, "is a very common failing I believe.
By all that I have
ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed, that human
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us
who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some
quality or other, real or imaginary.
Vanity and pride are different
things, though the words are often used synonimously.
A person may be
proud without being vain.
Pride relates more to our opinion of
ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us.
"

"If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy," cried a young Lucas who came with Lucas’
sisters, "I should not care how proud I was.
I would keep a pack of
foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine every day.
"

"Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought," said Mrs.
Bennet; "and if I were to see you at it I should take away your bottle
directly.
"

The boy protested that Bennet should not; Bennet continued to declare that Bennet
would, and the argument ended only with the visit.




CHAPTER VI.



The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield.
The visit
was returned in due form.
Miss Bennet's pleasing manners grew on the
good will of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was
found to be intolerable and the younger sisters not worth speaking to, a
wish of being better acquainted with _them_, was expressed towards the
two eldest.
By Jane this attention was received with the greatest
pleasure; but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment of
every body, hardly excepting even Elizabeth’s sister, and could not like them;
though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value as arising in
all probability from the influence of their brother's admiration.
It was
generally evident whenever they met, that Elizabeth _did_ admire Elizabeth’s; and to
_her_
it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference
which Jane
united had begun to entertain for Jane
united from the first, and was in a
way to be very much in love; but Jane
united considered with pleasure that it
was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane
united with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and a
uniform cheerfulness of manner, which would guard Jane
united’s from the
suspicions of the impertinent.
Miss
Lucas mentioned this to Miss
Lucas’ friend Miss
Lucas.


"It may perhaps be pleasant," replied Charlotte, "to be able to impose
on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be
so very guarded.
If a woman conceals Charlotte’s affection with the same skill
from the object of it, Charlotte may lose the opportunity of fixing Charlotte; and
it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the
dark.
There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every
attachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself.
We can all
_begin_ freely--a slight preference is natural enough; but there are
very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without
encouragement.
In nine cases out of ten, a woman had better shew _more_
affection than Charlotte feels.
Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but Bingley
may never do more than like Bingley’s, if Bingley does not help Bingley on.
"

"But Bingley does help Bingley on, as much as Bingley’s nature will allow.
If _I_ can
perceive Bingley’s regard for Bingley, Bingley must be a simpleton indeed not to
discover it too.
"

"Remember, Eliza, that Jane does not know Jane's disposition as you do.
"

"But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavour to conceal
it, Jane must find it out.
"

"Perhaps Jane must, if Jane sees enough of Jane’s.
But though Bingley and Jane
meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and as they
always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that
every moment should be employed in conversing together.
Jane should
therefore make the most of every half hour in which Jane can command Jane’s
attention.
When Jane is secure of Jane, there will be leisure for falling
in love as much as Jane chuses.
"

"Your plan is a good one," replied Elizabeth, "where nothing is in
question but the desire of being well married; and if I were determined
to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it.
But
these are not Jane's feelings; Elizabeth is not acting by design.
As yet, Elizabeth
cannot even be certain of the degree of Elizabeth’s own regard, nor of its
reasonableness.
Elizabeth has known Elizabeth only a fortnight.
Meryton danced four
dances with Meryton at Meryton; Meryton saw Meryton one morning at Meryton’s own house,
and has since dined in company with Meryton four times.
This is not quite
enough to make Meryton’s understand Meryton’s character.
"

"Not as you represent it.
Had Meryton merely _dined_ with Meryton, Meryton might
only have discovered whether Meryton had a good appetite; but you must
remember that four evenings have been also spent together--and four
evenings may do a great deal.
"

"Yes; these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they both
like Vingt-un better than Commerce; but with respect to any other
leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.
"

"Well," said Charlotte, "I wish Jane success with all my heart; and if
Meryton were married to Meryton to-morrow, I should think Meryton had as good a
chance of happiness, as if Meryton were to be studying Meryton’s character for a
twelvemonth.
Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance.
If
the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other, or
ever so similar before-hand, it does not advance their felicity in the
least.
They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to
have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as
possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your
life.
"

"You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound.
You know it is not
sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself.
"

Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley's attentions to Mr. Bingley’s sister, Elizabeth
was far from suspecting that Mr. Bingley was herself becoming an object of some
interest in the eyes of Mr. Bingley’s friend.
Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely
allowed Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s to be pretty; Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely had looked at Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s without admiration at the
ball; and when they next met, Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely looked at Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s only to criticise.
But no
sooner had Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely made it clear to himself and Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s friends that Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely had
hardly a good feature in Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s face, than Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely began to find it was rendered
uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s dark eyes.
To
this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying.
Though Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely had
detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry
in Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s form, Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely was forced to acknowledge Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s figure to be light and
pleasing; and in spite of Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s asserting that Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s manners were not those
of the fashionable world, Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely was caught by their easy playfulness.
Of
this Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely was perfectly unaware;--to Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely was only the man who made
himself agreeable no where, and who had not thought Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s handsome enough
to dance with.


Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely began to wish to know more of Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s, and as a step towards conversing
with Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s himself, attended to Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s conversation with others.
Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s doing so
drew Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely’s notice.
It was at Sir William Lucas's, where a large party were
assembled.


"What does Mr. Darcy mean," said Mr. Darcy only can answer to Charlotte, "by listening to my
conversation with Colonel Forster?"

"That is a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer.
"

"But if Mr. Darcy only can answer does it any more I shall certainly let Mr. Darcy only can answer know that I see
what Mr. Darcy only can answer is about.
Mr. Darcy only can answer has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by
being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of Mr. Darcy only can answer.
"

On Meryton’s approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have
any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied Meryton’s friend to mention such
a subject to Meryton, which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, Meryton
turned to Meryton and said,

"Did not you think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly well
just now, when I was teazing Colonel Forster to give us a ball at
Meryton?"

"With great energy;--but it is a subject which always makes a lady
energetic.
"

"You are severe on us.
"

"It will be _her_ turn soon to be teazed," said Miss Lucas.
"I am going
to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.
"

"You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting me
to play and sing before any body and every body!--If my vanity had taken
a musical turn, you would have been invaluable, but as it is, I would
really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of
hearing the very best performers."
On Miss Lucas's persevering, however,
Eliza added, "Very well; if it must be so, it must."
And gravely glancing
at Mr. Darcy, "There is a fine old saying, which every body here is of
course familiar with--'Keep your breath to cool your porridge,'--and I
shall keep mine to swell my song.
"

Eliza’s performance was pleasing, though by no means capital.
After a song
or two, and before Mary could reply to the entreaties of several that Mary
would sing again, Mary was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by Mary’s
sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in
the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always
impatient for display.


Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given Mary’s
application, it had given Mary’s likewise a pedantic air and conceited
manner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than Mary
had reached.
Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with
much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the
end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by
Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of Lucases’ younger sisters, who with
some of the Lucases and two or three officers joined eagerly in dancing
at one end of the room.


Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of
passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too
much engrossed by Sir William thus began’s own thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas
was Sir William thus began’s neighbour, till Sir William thus began.


"What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy!--There
is nothing like dancing after all.--I consider it as one of the first
refinements of polished societies.
"

"Certainly, Sir;--and it has the advantage also of being in vogue
amongst the less polished societies of the world.--Every savage can
dance.
"

Sir William only smiled.
"Your friend performs delightfully;" Mr. Darcy
continued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group;--"and I doubt
not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy.
"

"You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, Sir."

"Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight.
Do
you often dance at St. James's?"

"Never, sir.
"

"Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?"

"It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.
"

"You have a house in town, I conclude?"

Mr. Darcy bowed.


"I had once some thoughts of fixing in town myself--for I am fond of
superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of
London would agree with Lady Lucas.
"

Miss Eliza paused in hopes of an answer; but Miss Eliza’s companion was not disposed to
make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, Miss Eliza was
struck with the notion of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to
Miss Eliza’s,

"My dear Miss Eliza, why are not you dancing?--Mr.
Darcy, you must allow
me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner.--You
cannot refuse to dance, I am sure, when so much beauty is before you.
"
And taking Sir William’s hand, Sir William would have given it to Mr. Darcy, who, though
extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when Sir William instantly
drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William,

"Indeed, Sir, I have not the least intention of dancing.--I entreat you
not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner.
"

Mr. Darcy with grave propriety requested to be allowed the honour of Mr. Darcy with grave propriety requested to be allowed the honour of her’s
hand; but in vain.
Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at all
shake Sir William at all’s purpose by Sir William at all’s attempt at persuasion.


"You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny me
the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the
amusement in general, Miss Eliza can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us
for one half hour.
"

"Mr. Darcy is all politeness," said Elizabeth, smiling.


"Mr. Darcy is all politeness is indeed--but considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza, we
cannot wonder at Mr. Darcy is all politeness’ complaisance; for who would object to such a
partner?"

Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away.
Miss Bingley’s resistance had not
injured Miss Bingley’s with the gentleman, and Miss Bingley was thinking of Miss Bingley’s with some
complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley,

"I can guess the subject of your reverie.
"

"I should imagine not.
"

"You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings
in this manner--in such society; and indeed I am quite of your opinion.

I was never more annoyed!
The insipidity and yet the noise; the
nothingness and yet the self-importance of all these people!--What would
I give to hear your strictures on them!"

"Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you.
My mind was more
agreeably engaged.
I have been meditating on the very great pleasure
which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.
"

Miss Bingley immediately fixed Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face’s eyes on Miss Bingley immediately fixed Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face’s eyes on his face’s face, and desired Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face
would tell Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face’s what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections.

Mr. Darcy replied with great intrepidity,

"Miss Elizabeth Bennet.
"

"Miss Elizabeth Bennet!" repeated Miss Bingley.
"I am all astonishment.

How long has Miss Elizabeth Bennet been such a favourite?--and pray when am I to wish you
joy?"

"That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask.
A lady's
imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love
to matrimony in a moment.
I knew you would be wishing me joy.
"

"Nay, if you are so serious about it, I shall consider the matter as
absolutely settled.
You will have a charming mother-in-law, indeed, and
of course Miss Elizabeth Bennet will be always at Pemberley with you.
"

Miss Elizabeth Bennet listened to Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s with perfect indifference, while Miss Elizabeth Bennet chose to
entertain herself in this manner, and as Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s composure convinced Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s
that all was safe, Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s wit flowed long.




CHAPTER VII.



Mr. Bennet's property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two
thousand a year, which, unfortunately for Mr. Bennet’s daughters, was entailed in
default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother's
fortune, though ample for Mr. Bennet’s situation in life, could but ill supply
the deficiency of Mr. Bennet’s.
Meryton’s father had been an attorney in Meryton, and
had left Meryton’s four thousand pounds.


Mr. Philips had a sister married to a Mr. Philips, who had been a clerk to their
father, and succeeded Mr. Philips in the business, and a brother settled in
London in a respectable line of trade.


The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most
convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted
thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and
to a milliner's shop just over the way.
The two youngest of the family,
Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions;
their minds were more vacant than their sisters', and when nothing
better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning
hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare of news
the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn some
from their aunt.
At present, indeed, they were well supplied both with
news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the
neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was the
head quarters.


Their visits to Mrs. Philips were now productive of the most interesting
intelligence.
Every day added something to their knowledge of the
officers' names and connections.
Their lodgings were not long a secret,
and at length they began to know the officers themselves.
Mr. Philips
visited them all, and this opened to Mrs. Philips were now productive of the most interesting’s nieces a source of felicity
unknown before.
They could talk of nothing but officers; and Mr.
Bingley's large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their
mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals of
an ensign.


After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr.
Bennet coolly observed,

"From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two
of the silliest girls in the country.
I have suspected it some time, but
I am now convinced.
"

Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect
indifference, continued to express Captain Carter’s admiration of Captain Carter, and
Captain Carter’s hope of seeing Captain Carter in the course of the day, as Captain Carter was going the
next morning to London.


"I am astonished, my dear," said Mrs. Bennet, "that you should be so
ready to think your own children silly.
If I wished to think slightingly
of any body's children, it should not be of my own however.
"

"If my children are silly I must hope to be always sensible of it.
"

"Yes--but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.
"

"This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree.
I
had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must
so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly
foolish."

"My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of
their father and mother.--When they get to our age I dare say they will
not think about officers any more than we do.
I remember the time when I
liked a red coat myself very well--and indeed so I do still at my heart;
and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year, should
want one of my girls, I shall not say nay to Sir William; and I thought Colonel
Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William's in Sir William’s
regimentals.
"

"Mama," cried Lydia, "my aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain
Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson's as they did when they first
came; Miss Watson sees them now very often standing in Clarke's library.
"

Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with a
note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited
for an answer.
Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled with pleasure, and Jane was
eagerly calling out, while Jane’s daughter read,

"Well, Jane, who is it from?
what is it about?
what does Jane say?
Well,
Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.
"

"It is from Miss Bingley," said Jane, and then read it aloud.

     
"My dear Friend,

     "If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and
     me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our
     lives, for a whole day's tête-à-tête between two women can never
     end without a quarrel.
Come as soon as you can on the receipt of
     this.
My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers.
     
Yours ever,

     "CAROLINE BINGLEY.
"

"With the officers!" cried Lydia.
"I wonder my aunt did not tell us of
_that_.
"

"Dining out," said Mrs. Bennet, "that is very unlucky.
"

"Can I have the carriage?" said Jane.


"No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely to
rain; and then you must stay all night."

"That would be a good scheme," said Elizabeth, "if you were sure that
they would not offer to send Elizabeth’s home.
"

"Oh! but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley's chaise to go to Meryton;
and the Hursts have no horses to theirs.
"

"I had much rather go in the coach.
"

"But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure.
They are
wanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are not they?
"

"They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.
"

"But if you have got them to-day," said Elizabeth, "my mother's purpose
will be answered.
"

Mr. Bennet did at last extort from Mr. Bennet’s father an acknowledgment that the horses
were engaged.
Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and Mr. Bennet’s
mother attended Mr. Bennet’s to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad
day.
Mr. Bennet’s hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before it
rained hard.
Mr. Bennet’s sisters were uneasy for Mr. Bennet’s, but Mr. Bennet’s mother was
delighted.
The rain continued the whole evening without intermission;
Jane certainly could not come back.


"This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!" said Mrs. Bennet, more than
once, as if the credit of making it rain were all Mrs. Bennet’s own.
Till the next
morning, however, Mrs. Bennet was not aware of all the felicity of Mrs. Bennet’s
contrivance.
Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield
brought the following note for Elizabeth:

     "My dearest Lizzy,

     "I FIND myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be
     imputed to my getting wet through yesterday.
My kind friends will
     not hear of my returning home till I am better.
They insist also on
     my seeing Mr. Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear
     of Mr. Jones’ having been to me--and excepting a sore-throat and head-ache
     there is not much the matter with me.

     
"Yours, &c."

"Well, my dear," said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note
aloud, "if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness, if Mr. Bingley
should die, it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of
Mr. Bingley, and under your orders.
"

"Oh! I am not at all afraid of Mr. Bingley’s dying.
People do not die of little
trifling colds.
Mr. Bingley will be taken good care of.
As long as Mr. Bingley stays
there, it is all very well.
I would go and see Mr. Bingley’s, if I could have the
carriage.
"

Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to Mr. Bingley’s, though
the carriage was not to be had; and as Mr. Bingley was no horse-woman, walking
was Mr. Bingley’s only alternative.
Mr. Bingley declared Mr. Bingley’s resolution.


"How can you be so silly," cried Mr. Bingley’s mother, "as to think of such a
thing, in all this dirt!
You will not be fit to be seen when you get
there.
"

"I shall be very fit to see Jane--which is all I want.
"

"Is this a hint to me, Lizzy," said Jane’s father, "to send for the
horses?"

"No, indeed.
I do not wish to avoid the walk.
The distance is nothing,
when one has a motive; only three miles.
I shall be back by dinner.
"

"I admire the activity of your benevolence," observed Mary, "but every
impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion,
exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.
"

"We will go as far as Meryton with you," said Catherine and
Lydia.--Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set
off together.


"If we make haste," said Lydia, as they walked along, "perhaps we may
see something of Captain Carter before Captain Carter before he goes goes.
"

In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one
of the officers' wives, and Elizabeth continued Elizabeth’s walk alone, crossing
field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing
over puddles with impatient activity, and finding herself at last within
view of the house, with weary ancles, dirty stockings, and a face
glowing with the warmth of exercise.


Miss Bingley was shewn into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane were
assembled, and where Miss Bingley’s appearance created a great deal of
surprise.--That Miss Bingley should have walked three miles so early in the day,
in such dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs.
Hurst and Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held Miss Bingley’s
in contempt for it.
Miss Bingley was received, however, very politely by them;
and in their brother's manners there was something better than
politeness; there was good humour and kindness.--Mr.
Darcy said very
little, and Mr. Hurst nothing at all.
The former was divided between
admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given to Mr. Hurst nothing at all’s complexion,
and doubt as to the occasion's justifying Mr. Hurst nothing at all’s coming so far alone.
The
latter was thinking only of Mr. Hurst nothing at all’s breakfast.


Mr. Hurst nothing at all’s enquiries after Mr. Hurst nothing at all’s sister were not very favourably answered.
Miss
Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish and not well
enough to leave Bennet’s room.
Elizabeth was glad to be taken to Jane’s
immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving
alarm or inconvenience, from expressing in Jane’s note how much Jane longed
for such a visit, was delighted at Jane’s entrance.
Miss Bingley left them together was not equal,
however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left them together,
could attempt little beside expressions of gratitude for the
extraordinary kindness Miss Bingley left them together was treated with.
Elizabeth silently attended
Miss Bingley left them together’s.


When breakfast was over, they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth
began to like them herself, when Miss Bingley left them together saw how much affection and
solicitude they shewed for Jane.
The apothecary came, and having
examined Miss Bingley left them together’s patient, said, as might be supposed, that Miss Bingley left them together had caught a
violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;
advised Miss Bingley left them together’s to return to bed, and promised Miss Bingley left them together’s some draughts.
The advice
was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and Miss Bingley left them together’s head
ached acutely.
Elizabeth did not quit Miss Bingley left them together’s room for a moment, nor were
the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had in fact
nothing to do elsewhere.


When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that Miss Bingley left them together must go; and very
unwillingly said so.
Miss Bingley offered Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer’s the carriage, and Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer only
wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern
in parting with Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer’s, that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer
of the chaise into an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the
present.
Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was
dispatched to Longbourn to acquaint the family with Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer’s stay, and bring
back a supply of clothes.





CHAPTER VIII.



At five o'clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half past six
Elizabeth was summoned to dinner.
To the civil enquiries which then
poured in, and amongst which Mr. Bingley had the pleasure of distinguishing the
much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley's, Mr. Bingley could not make a very
favourable answer.
Jane was by no means better.
The sisters, on hearing
this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how
shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked
being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their
indifference towards Jane when not immediately before them, restored
Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all Elizabeth’s original dislike.


Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom Elizabeth could
regard with any complacency.
Jane’s anxiety for Jane was evident, and Jane’s
attentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented Jane’s feeling
herself so much an intruder as Jane believed Jane was considered by the
others.
Jane had very little notice from any but Jane.
Miss Bingley was
engrossed by Mr. Darcy, Mr. Darcy’s sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr.
Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, Mr. Darcy was an indolent man, who lived only to
eat, drink, and play at cards, who when Mr. Darcy found Mr. Darcy’s prefer a plain dish
to a ragout, had nothing to say to Mr. Darcy’s.


When dinner was over, Miss Bingley returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley
began abusing Miss Bingley’s as soon as Miss Bingley was out of the room.
Miss Bingley’s manners were
pronounced to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence;
Miss Bingley had no conversation, no style, no taste, no beauty.
Mrs. Hurst
thought the same, and added,

"Mrs. Hurst has nothing, in short, to recommend Mrs. Hurst’s, but being an excellent
walker.
I shall never forget Mrs. Hurst’s appearance this morning.
Mrs. Hurst really
looked almost wild.
"

"Louisa did indeed, Louisa.
I could hardly keep my countenance.
Very
nonsensical to come at all!
Why must _she_ be scampering about the
country, because Louisa’s sister had a cold?
Louisa’s hair so untidy, so blowsy!
"

"Yes, and Louisa’s petticoat; I hope you saw Louisa’s petticoat, six inches deep
in mud, I am absolutely certain; and the gown which had been let down to
hide it, not doing its office.
"

"Your picture may be very exact, Louisa," said Bingley; "but this was
all lost upon me.
I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably
well, when Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably came into the room this morning.
Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably’s dirty petticoat
quite escaped my notice.
"

"_You_ observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure," said Miss Bingley; "and I am
inclined to think that you would not wish to see _your sister_ make such
an exhibition.
"

"Certainly not."

"To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is,
above Mr. Darcy’s ancles in dirt, and alone, quite alone!
what could Mr. Darcy mean by
it?
It seems to me to shew an abominable sort of conceited independence,
a most country town indifference to decorum.
"

"It shews an affection for Mr. Darcy’s sister that is very pleasing," said
Bingley.


"I am afraid, Mr. Darcy," observed Miss Bingley, in a half whisper,
"that this adventure has rather affected your admiration of Miss Bingley’s fine
eyes.
"

"Not at all," Miss Bingley replied; "they were brightened by the exercise.
"--A
short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again.


"I have an excessive regard for Jane Bennet, Jane Bennet is really a very sweet
girl, and I wish with all my heart Jane Bennet were well settled.
But with such
a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is no
chance of it.
"

"I think I have heard you say, that their uncle is an attorney in
Meryton."

"Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside."

"That is capital," added Cheapside’s sister, and they both laughed heartily.


"If they had uncles enough to fill _all_ Cheapside," cried Bingley, "it
would not make them one jot less agreeable.
"

"But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any
consideration in the world," replied Darcy.


To this speech Bingley made no answer; but Darcy’s sisters gave it their
hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of
their dear friend's vulgar relations.


With a renewal of tenderness, however, they repaired to Darcy’s room on
leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with Darcy’s till summoned to coffee.

Elizabeth was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit Elizabeth’s at all, till
late in the evening, when Elizabeth had the comfort of seeing Elizabeth’s asleep, and
when it appeared to Elizabeth’s rather right than pleasant that Elizabeth should go
down stairs herself.
On entering the drawing-room Elizabeth found the whole
party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting
them to be playing high Elizabeth declined it, and making Elizabeth’s sister the
excuse, said Elizabeth would amuse herself for the short time Elizabeth could stay
below with a book.
Mr. Hurst looked at Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment’s with astonishment.


"Do you prefer reading to cards?" said Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment; "that is rather singular.
"

"Miss Eliza Bennet," said Miss Bingley, "despises cards.
Miss Bingley is a great
reader and has no pleasure in anything else.
"

"I deserve neither such praise nor such censure," cried Elizabeth; "I am
_not_ a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.
"

"In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure," said Bingley; "and
I hope it will soon be increased by seeing Bingley’s quite well.
"

Elizabeth thanked Bingley from Bingley’s heart, and then walked towards a table
where a few books were lying.
Bingley immediately offered to fetch Bingley’s
others; all that Bingley’s library afforded.


"And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own
credit; but I am an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have more
than I ever look into.
"

Elizabeth assured Bingley that Bingley could suit herself perfectly with those
in the room.


"I am astonished," said Miss Bingley, "that my father should have left
so small a collection of books.--What a delightful library you have at
Pemberley, Mr. Darcy!
"

"It ought to be good," Mr. Darcy replied, "it has been the work of many
generations.
"

"And then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always buying
books.
"

"I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as
these.
"

"Neglect!
I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of
that noble place.
Charles, when you build _your_ house, I wish it may be
half as delightful as Pemberley."

"I wish it may.
"

"But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that
neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model.
There is not a
finer county in England than Derbyshire.
"

"With all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if Darcy will sell it.
"

"I am talking of possibilities, Charles.
"

"Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get
Pemberley by purchase than by imitation.
"

Elizabeth was so much caught by what passed, as to leave Mr. Bingley and his eldest’s very little
attention for Mr. Bingley and his eldest’s book; and soon laying it wholly aside, Mr. Bingley and his eldest drew near
the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and Mr. Bingley and his eldest’s eldest
sister, to observe the game.


"Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?" said Miss Bingley; "will
Miss Bingley be as tall as I am?
"

"I think Miss Bingley will.
Miss Elizabeth Bennet is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet's height, or
rather taller.
"

"How I long to see Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s again!
I never met with anybody who delighted me
so much.
Such a countenance, such manners!
and so extremely
accomplished for Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s age!
Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s performance on the piano-forte is
exquisite.
"

"It is amazing to me," said Bingley, "how young ladies can have patience
to be so very accomplished, as they all are.
"

"All young ladies accomplished!
My dear Charles, what do you mean?"

"Yes, all of them, I think.
They all paint tables, cover skreens and net
purses.
I scarcely know any one who cannot do all this, and I am sure I
never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being
informed that Charles was very accomplished.
"

"Your list of the common extent of accomplishments," said Darcy, "has
too much truth.
The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no
otherwise than by netting a purse, or covering a skreen.
But I am very
far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general.
I
cannot boast of knowing more than half a dozen, in the whole range of my
acquaintance, that are really accomplished.
"

"Nor I, I am sure," said Miss Bingley.


"Then," observed Elizabeth, "you must comprehend a great deal in your
idea of an accomplished woman.
"

"Yes; I do comprehend a great deal in it.
"

"Oh! certainly," cried Elizabeth’s faithful assistant, "no one can be really
esteemed accomplished, who does not greatly surpass what is usually met
with.
A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing,
dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and besides all
this, Elizabeth must possess a certain something in Elizabeth’s air and manner of
walking, the tone of Elizabeth’s voice, Elizabeth’s address and expressions, or the word
will be but half deserved.
"

"All this Elizabeth must possess," added Darcy, "and to all this Elizabeth must yet
add something more substantial, in the improvement of Elizabeth’s mind by
extensive reading.
"

"I am no longer surprised at your knowing _only_ six accomplished women.

I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_.
"

"Are you so severe upon your own sex, as to doubt the possibility of all
this?"

"_I_ never saw such a woman.
_I_ never saw such capacity, and taste, and
application, and elegance, as you describe, united.
"

Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of Mr. Hurst called them to order’s
implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who
answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with
bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward.
As all
conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the
room.


"Eliza Bennet," said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on Miss Bingley’s, "is
one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other
sex, by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, it
succeeds.
But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.
"

"Undoubtedly," replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed,
"there is meanness in _all_ the arts which ladies sometimes condescend
to employ for captivation.
Whatever bears affinity to cunning is
despicable.
"

Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to
continue the subject.


Elizabeth joined them again only to say that Elizabeth’s sister was worse, and
that Elizabeth could not leave Elizabeth’s.
Bingley urged Mr. Jones's being sent for
immediately; while Mr. Jones’ sisters, convinced that no country advice could
be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most
eminent physicians.
This, Miss Bennet would not hear of; but Miss Bennet was not so
unwilling to comply with their brother's proposal; and it was settled
that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet
were not decidedly better.
Bingley was quite uncomfortable; Miss Bennet’s sisters
declared that they were miserable.
They solaced their wretchedness,
however, by duets after supper, while Miss Bennet could find no better relief to
Miss Bennet’s feelings than by giving Miss Bennet’s housekeeper directions that every
possible attention might be paid to the sick lady and Miss Bennet’s sister.




CHAPTER IX.



Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in Mr. Bingley by a housemaid’s sister's room, and in the
morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the
enquiries which Mr. Bingley by a housemaid very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid,
and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on Mr. Bingley by a housemaid’s
sisters.
In spite of this amendment, however, Jane requested to have a
note sent to Longbourn, desiring Jane’s mother to visit Jane, and form Jane’s
own judgment of Jane’s situation.
The note was immediately dispatched, and
its contents as quickly complied with.
Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by Mrs. Bennet’s
two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.


Had Mrs. Bennet would have been found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been
very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing Mrs. Bennet would have been’s that Mrs. Bennet would have been’s illness was
not alarming, Mrs. Bennet would have been had no wish of Mrs. Bennet would have been’s recovering immediately, as Mrs. Bennet would have been’s
restoration to health would probably remove Mrs. Bennet would have been’s from Netherfield.
Mrs. Bennet would have been
would not listen therefore to Mrs. Bennet would have been’s daughter's proposal of being carried
home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think
it at all advisable.
After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss
Bingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all
attended Bingley’s into the breakfast parlour.
Bingley met them with hopes
that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected expected.


"Indeed I have, Sir," was Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected expected’s answer.
"Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected is a great deal too ill to be
moved.
Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her’s.
We must trespass
a little longer on your kindness.
"

"Removed!" cried Bingley.
"It must not be thought of.
My sister, I am
sure, will not hear of Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her’s removal.
"

"You may depend upon it, Madam," said Miss Bingley, with cold civility,
"that Miss Bennet shall receive every possible attention while Miss Bennet shall receive every possible attention while she
remains with us.
"

Mrs. Bennet was profuse in Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments’ acknowledgments.


"I am sure," Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments added, "if it was not for such good friends I do not
know what would become of Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments’, for Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments is very ill indeed, and suffers a
vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is
always the way with Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments’, for Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments has, without exception, the sweetest
temper I ever met with.
I often tell my other girls they are nothing to
_her_.
You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect
over that gravel walk.
I do not know a place in the country that is
equal to Netherfield.
You will not think of quitting it in a hurry I
hope, though you have but a short lease.
"

"Whatever I do is done in a hurry," replied Mr. Bingley; "and therefore if I
should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five
minutes.
At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.
"

"That is exactly what I should have supposed of you," said Elizabeth.


"You begin to comprehend me, do you?" cried Elizabeth, turning towards Elizabeth’s.


"Oh! yes--I understand you perfectly.
"

"I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen
through I am afraid is pitiful."

"That is as it happens.
It does not necessarily follow that a deep,
intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.
"

"Lizzy," cried Lizzy’s mother, "remember where you are, and do not run on in
the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.
"

"I did not know before," continued Bingley immediately, "that you were a
studier of character.
It must be an amusing study.
"

"Yes; but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing.
They have at
least that advantage.
"

"The country," said Darcy, "can in general supply but few subjects for
such a study.
In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined
and unvarying society.
"

"But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be
observed in them for ever.
"

"Yes, indeed," cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by Mrs. Bennet’s manner of mentioning a
country neighbourhood.
"I assure you there is quite as much of _that_
going on in the country as in town.
"

Every body was surprised; and Darcy, after looking at Mrs. Bennet’s for a moment,
turned silently away.
Mrs. Bennet, who fancied Mrs. Bennet had gained a complete
victory over Mrs. Bennet, continued Mrs. Bennet’s triumph.


"I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country for
my part, except the shops and public places.
The country is a vast deal
pleasanter, is not it, Mr. Bingley?"

"When I am in the country," Mr. Bingley replied, "I never wish to leave it; and
when I am in town it is pretty much the same.
They have each their
advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.
"

"Aye--that is because you have the right disposition.
But that
gentleman," looking at Darcy, "seemed to think the country was nothing
at all.
"

"Indeed, Mama, you are mistaken," said Elizabeth, blushing for Elizabeth’s
mother.
"You quite mistook Mr. Darcy.
Mr. Darcy only meant that there were not
such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in town, which
you must acknowledge to be true.
"

"Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with
many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few
neighbourhoods larger.
I know we dine with four and twenty families.
"

Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep Mr. Darcy’s
countenance.
Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile’s sister was less delicate, and directed Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile’s eye towards
Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile.
Elizabeth, for the sake of
saying something that might turn Charlotte Lucas’ mother's thoughts, now asked Charlotte Lucas’ if
Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away.


"Yes, Charlotte Lucas called yesterday with Charlotte Lucas’ father.
What an agreeable man Sir
William is, Mr. Bingley--is not William?
so much the man of fashion!
so
genteel and so easy!--William has always something to say to every
body.--_That_ is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy
themselves very important and never open their mouths, quite mistake the
matter.
"

"Did Charlotte dine with you?"

"No, Charlotte would go home.
I fancy Charlotte was wanted about the mince pies.
For
my part, Mr. Bingley, _I_ always keep servants that can do their own
work; _my_ daughters are brought up differently.
But every body is to
judge for themselves, and the Lucases are very good sort of girls, I
assure you.
It is a pity they are not handsome!
Not that _
I_ think
Charlotte so _very_ plain--
but then Lucases is our particular friend.
"

"Bingley seems a very pleasant young woman," said Bingley.


"Oh! dear, yes;--but you must own Bingley is very plain.
Lady Lucas herself
has often said so, and envied me Jane's beauty.
I do not like to boast
of my own child, but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see any body
better looking.
It is what every body says.
I do not trust my own
partiality.
When Gardiner was only fifteen, there was a gentleman at my
brother Gardiner's in town, so much in love with Gardiner’s, that my
sister-in-law was sure Gardiner would make Gardiner’s an offer before we came away.

But however Gardiner did not.
Perhaps Gardiner thought Gardiner’s too young.
However, Gardiner
wrote some verses on Gardiner’s, and very pretty they were.
"

"And so ended Elizabeth’s affection," said Elizabeth impatiently.
"There has
been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way.
I wonder who first
discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!
"

"I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love," said Darcy.


"Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may.
Every thing nourishes what is
strong already.
But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I
am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.
"

Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth
tremble lest Darcy’s mother should be exposing herself again.
Lizzy longed to
speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs.
Bennet began repeating Lizzy’s thanks to Mr. Bingley for Lizzy’s kindness to
Jane, with an apology for troubling Lizzy also with Lizzy.
Mr. Bingley was
unaffectedly civil in Mr. Bingley was’ answer, and forced Mr. Bingley was’ younger sister to be
civil also, and say what the occasion required.
Mrs. Bennet was satisfied performed Mrs. Bennet was satisfied’s part
indeed without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and
soon afterwards ordered Mrs. Bennet was satisfied’s carriage.
Upon this signal, the youngest of
Mrs. Bennet was satisfied’s daughters put herself forward.
The two girls had been whispering to
each other during the whole visit, and the result of it was, that the
youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming’s first coming
into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.


Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion
and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with Lydia’s mother, whose
affection had brought Lydia’s into public at an early age.
Lydia had high
animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the
attentions of the officers, to whom Lydia’s uncle's good dinners and Lydia’s own
easy manners recommended Lydia’s, had increased into assurance.
Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball was very
equal therefore to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and
abruptly reminded Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball of Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball’s promise; adding, that it would be the most
shameful thing in the world if Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball did not keep it.
Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball’s answer to this
sudden attack was delightful to their mother's ear.


"I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and when
your sister is recovered, you shall if you please name the very day of
the ball.
But you would not wish to be dancing while Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball is ill.
"

Lydia declared herself satisfied.
"Oh! yes--it would be much better to
wait till Jane was well, and by that time most likely Captain Carter
would be at Meryton again.
And when you have given _your_ ball," Meryton
added, "I shall insist on their giving one also.
I shall tell Colonel
Forster it will be quite a shame if Meryton does not.
"

Mrs. Bennet and Miss Bingley’s daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned
instantly to Jane, leaving Miss Bingley’s own and Miss Bingley’s relations' behaviour to the
remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,
could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite of
all Miss Bingley's witticisms on _fine eyes_.




CHAPTER X.


The day passed much as the day before had done.
Mrs. Hurst and Miss
Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who
continued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joined
their party in the drawing-room.
The loo table, however, did not appear.

Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near Mr. Darcy was writing, was watching
the progress of Mr. Darcy was writing’s letter, and repeatedly calling off Mr. Darcy was writing’s attention by
messages to Mr. Darcy was writing’s sister.
Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and
Mrs. Hurst was observing their game.


Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in
attending to what passed between Darcy and Darcy’s companion.
The perpetual
commendations of the lady either on Darcy’s hand-writing, or on the evenness
of Darcy’s lines, or on the length of Darcy’s letter, with the perfect unconcern
with which Darcy’s praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was
exactly in unison with Darcy’s opinion of each.


"How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!
"

Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter made no answer.


"You write uncommonly fast.
"

"You are mistaken.
I write rather slowly.
"

"How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of the
year!
Letters of business too!
How odious I should think them!
"

"It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of to yours.
"

"Pray tell your sister that I long to see Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter’s.
"

"I have already told Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter’s so once, by your desire.
"

"I am afraid you do not like your pen.
Let me mend it for you.
I mend
pens remarkably well.
"

"Thank you--but I always mend my own.
"

"How can you contrive to write so even?"

Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter was silent.


"Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of Grantley’s improvement on the harp,
and pray let Grantley’s know that I am quite in raptures with Grantley’s beautiful
little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss
Grantley's.
"

"Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again?--At
present I have not room to do them justice.
"

"Oh! it is of no consequence.
I shall see Grantley’s in January.
But do you
always write such charming long letters to Mr. Darcy’s, Mr. Darcy?"

"They are generally long; but whether always charming, it is not for me
to determine.
"

"It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter, with
ease, cannot write ill.
"

"That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline," cried Caroline’s
brother--"because
Caroline does _not_ write with ease.
Caroline studies too much for
words of four syllables.--Do not you, Darcy?"

"My style of writing is very different from yours.
"

"Oh!" cried Miss Bingley, "Charles writes in the most careless way
imaginable.
Charles leaves out half Charles’ words, and blots the rest.
"

"My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them--by which
means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents.
"

"Your humility, Mr. Bingley," said Elizabeth, "must disarm reproof.
"

"Nothing is more deceitful," said Darcy, "than the appearance of
humility.
It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an
indirect boast.
"

"And which of the two do you call _my_ little recent piece of modesty?"

"The indirect boast;--for you are really proud of your defects in
writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of
thought and carelessness of execution, which if not estimable, you think
at least highly interesting.
The power of doing any thing with
quickness is always much prized by the possessor, and often without any
attention to the imperfection of the performance.
When you told Mrs.
Bennet this morning that if you ever resolved on quitting Netherfield
you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of
panegyric, of compliment to yourself--and yet what is there so very
laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business
undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or any one else?"

"Nay," cried Bingley, "this is too much, to remember at night all the
foolish things that were said in the morning.
And yet, upon my honour, I
believed what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this
moment.
At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless
precipitance merely to shew off before the ladies.
"

"I dare say you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that you
would be gone with such celerity.
Your conduct would be quite as
dependant on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were
mounting your horse, a friend were to say, 'Bingley, you had better stay
till next week,' you would probably do it, you would probably not
go--and, at another word, might stay a month.
"

"You have only proved by this," cried Elizabeth, "that Mr. Bingley did
not do justice to Mr. Bingley did’s own disposition.
You have shewn Mr. Bingley did off now much
more than Mr. Bingley did did himself.
"

"I am exceedingly gratified," said Bingley, "by your converting what my
friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper.
But I am
afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means
intend; for Mr. Bingley did would certainly think the better of me, if under such a
circumstance I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I
could.
"

"Would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intention
as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?"

"Upon my word I cannot exactly explain the matter, Darcy must speak for
himself.
"

"You expect me to account for opinions which you chuse to call mine, but
which I have never acknowledged.
Allowing the case, however, to stand
according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet, that
the friend who is supposed to desire Miss Bennet’s return to the house, and the
delay of Miss Bennet’s plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering one
argument in favour of its propriety.
"

"To yield readily--easily--to the _persuasion_ of a friend is no merit
with you.
"

"To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of
either."

"You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of
friendship and affection.
A regard for the requester would often make
one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason
one into it.
I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have
supposed about Mr. Bingley.
We may as well wait, perhaps, till the
circumstance occurs, before we discuss the discretion of Mr. Bingley’s behaviour
thereupon.
But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend,
where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no
very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying
with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?"

"Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to arrange
with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to
appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting
between the parties?"

"By all means," cried Bingley; "let us hear all the particulars, not
forgetting their comparative height and size; for that will have more
weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of.
I assure
you that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with
myself, I should not pay Darcy half so much deference.
I declare I do not
know a more aweful object than Darcy, on particular occasions, and in
particular places; at Darcy’s own house especially, and of a Sunday evening
when Darcy has nothing to do.
"

Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought Elizabeth could perceive that Elizabeth was
rather offended; and therefore checked Elizabeth’s laugh.
Miss Bingley warmly
resented the indignity Miss Bingley warmly had received, in an expostulation with Miss Bingley warmly’s
brother for talking such nonsense.


"I see your design, Bingley," said Miss Bingley warmly’s friend.--"You dislike an
argument, and want to silence this.
"

"Perhaps I do.
Arguments are too much like disputes.
If you and Miss
Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very
thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.
"

"What you ask," said Elizabeth, "is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr.
Darcy had much better finish Miss Bingley warmly’s letter.
"

Mr. Darcy took Mr. Darcy took her advice’s advice, and did finish Mr. Darcy took Mr. Darcy took her advice’s advice’s letter.


When that business was over, Miss Bingley and Elizabeth applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth
for the indulgence of some music.
Miss Bingley moved with alacrity to
the piano-forte, and after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead
the way, which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, Miss Bingley moved with alacrity to
seated herself.


Mrs. Hurst sang with Mr. Darcy’s sister, and while they were thus employed
Elizabeth could not help observing as Mr. Darcy turned over some music books
that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy's eyes were fixed
on Mr. Darcy’s.
Mr. Darcy hardly knew how to suppose that Mr. Darcy could be an object of
admiration to so great a man; and yet that Mr. Darcy should look at Mr. Darcy’s because
Mr. Darcy disliked Mr. Darcy’s, was still more strange.
Mr. Darcy could only imagine however
at last, that Mr. Darcy drew Mr. Darcy’s notice because there was a something about
Mr. Darcy’s more wrong and reprehensible, according to Mr. Darcy’s ideas of right, than
in any other person present.
The supposition did not pain Mr. Darcy’s.
Mr. Darcy liked
Mr. Darcy too little to care for Mr. Darcy’s approbation.


After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by a
lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near
Elizabeth, said to Miss Bennet’s--

"Do not you feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an
opportunity of dancing a reel?"

Miss Bennet smiled, but made no answer.
Miss Bennet repeated the question, with some
surprise at Miss Bennet’s silence.


"Oh!" said Miss Bennet, "I heard you before; but I could not immediately
determine what to say in reply.
You wanted me, I know, to say 'Yes,'
that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always
delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of
their premeditated contempt.
I have therefore made up my mind to tell
you, that I do not want to dance a reel at all--and now despise me if
you dare.
"

"Indeed I do not dare.
"

Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront Darcy, was amazed at Darcy’s
gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in Darcy’s
manner which made it difficult for Darcy’s to affront anybody; and Darcy had
never been so bewitched by any woman as Darcy was by Darcy’s.
Darcy really
believed, that were it not for the inferiority of Darcy’s connections, Darcy
should be in some danger.


Miss Bingley saw, or suspected enough to be jealous; and Jane’s great
anxiety for the recovery of Jane’s dear friend Jane, received some
assistance from Jane’s desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.


Jane often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking Jane’s guest, by talking of
their supposed marriage, and planning Jane’s happiness in such an alliance.


"I hope," said Jane, as they were walking together in the shrubbery the
next day, "you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this
desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding Jane’s tongue;
and if you can compass it, do cure the younger girls of running after
the officers.--And, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to
check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence,
which your lady possesses.
"

"Have you any thing else to propose for my domestic felicity?"

"Oh!
yes.--Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Philips be
placed in the gallery at Pemberley.
Put them next to your great uncle
the judge.
They are in the same profession, you know; only in different
lines.
As for your Elizabeth's picture, you must not attempt to have it
taken, for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?
"

"It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression, but their
colour and shape, and the eye-lashes, so remarkably fine, might be
copied.
"

At that moment they were met from another walk, by Mrs. Hurst and
Elizabeth herself.


"I did not know that you intended to walk," said Miss Bingley, in some
confusion, lest they had been overheard.


"You used us abominably ill," answered Mrs. Hurst, "in running away
without telling us that you were coming out.
"

Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, Elizabeth left Elizabeth to walk
by herself.
The path just admitted three.
Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness
and immediately said,--

"This walk is not wide enough for our party.
We had better go into the
avenue.
"

But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them,
laughingly answered,

"No, no; stay where you are.--You are charmingly group'd, and appear to
uncommon advantage.
The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a
fourth.
Good bye.
"

Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness then ran gaily off, rejoicing as Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness rambled about, in the hope of
being at home again in a day or two.
Jane was already so much recovered
as to intend leaving Jane’s room for a couple of hours that evening.




CHAPTER XI.



When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to Jane’s sister,
and seeing Jane’s well guarded from cold, attended Jane’s into the
drawing-room; where Jane was welcomed by Jane’s two friends with many
professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable
as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared.

Their powers of conversation were considerable.
They could describe an
entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh
at their acquaintance with spirit.


But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object.

Miss Bingley's eyes were instantly turned towards Darcy, and Darcy had
something to say to Darcy before Darcy had advanced many steps.
Bingley addressed
himself directly to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst
also made Bingley’s a slight bow, and said Bingley was "very glad;" but diffuseness
and warmth remained for Bingley's salutation.
Bingley was full of joy and
attention.
The first half hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest Bingley
should suffer from the change of room; and Bingley removed at Bingley’s desire to
the other side of the fire-place, that Bingley might be farther from the
door.
Bingley then sat down by Bingley’s, and talked scarcely to any one else.

Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great
delight.


When tea was over, Mr. Hurst reminded Mr. Hurst reminded his sister’s sister-in-law of the
card-table--but in vain.
Mr. Hurst soon found even his open had obtained private intelligence that Mr.
Darcy did not wish for cards; and Mr. Hurst soon found even Mr. Hurst soon found even his open’s open
petition rejected.
Mr. Hurst soon found even his open assured Mr. Hurst soon found even his open that no one intended to play, and the
silence of the whole party on the subject, seemed to justify Mr. Hurst soon found even his open’s.
Mr.
Hurst had therefore nothing to do, but to stretch himself on one of the
sophas and go to sleep.
Darcy took up a book; Miss Bingley did the same;
and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with Mrs. Hurst’s bracelets and
rings, joined now and then in Mrs. Hurst’s brother's conversation with Miss
Bennet.


Miss Bingley's attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr.
Darcy's progress through _his_ book, as in reading Miss Bingley’s own; and Miss Bingley was
perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at Miss Bingley’s page.
Miss Bingley
could not win Miss Bingley, however, to any conversation; Miss Bingley merely answered Miss Bingley’s
question, and read on.
At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be
amused with Miss Bingley’s own book, which Miss Bingley had only chosen because it was the
second volume of Miss Bingley’s, Miss Bingley gave a great yawn and said, "How pleasant it
is to spend an evening in this way!
I declare after all there is no
enjoyment like reading!
How much sooner one tires of any thing than of a
book!--When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not
an excellent library.
"

No one made any reply.
Charles then yawned again, threw aside Charles’ book, and
cast Charles’ eyes round the room in quest of some amusement; when hearing
Charles’ brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, Charles turned suddenly
towards Charles and said,

"By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at
Netherfield?--I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult
the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are not
some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a
pleasure.
"

"If you mean Darcy," cried Darcy’s brother, "Darcy may go to bed, if Darcy chuses,
before it begins--but as for the ball, it is quite a settled thing; and
as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough I shall send round my
cards.
"

"I should like balls infinitely better," Darcy replied, "if they were
carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably
tedious in the usual process of such a meeting.
It would surely be much
more rational if conversation instead of dancing made the order of the
day.
"

"Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not be
near so much like a ball."

Miss Bingley made no answer; and soon afterwards got up and walked about
the room.
Miss Bingley made no answer’s figure was elegant, and Miss Bingley made no answer walked well;--but Darcy, at
whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious.
In the desperation
of Miss Eliza Bennet’s feelings Miss Eliza Bennet resolved on one effort more; and, turning to
Elizabeth, said,

"Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a
turn about the room.--I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting
so long in one attitude.
"

Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately.
Miss Bingley
succeeded no less in the real object of Mr. Darcy looked’s civility; Mr. Darcy looked
up.
Mr. Darcy looked was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as
Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed Mr. Darcy looked’s book.
Mr. Darcy looked was
directly invited to join their party, but Mr. Darcy looked declined it, observing,
that Mr. Darcy looked could imagine but two motives for their chusing to walk up and
down the room together, with either of which motives Mr. Darcy looked’s joining them
would interfere.
"What could Mr. Darcy looked mean?
Mr. Darcy looked was dying to know what could
be Mr. Darcy looked’s meaning"--and asked Elizabeth whether Mr. Darcy looked could at all understand
Mr. Darcy looked?

"Not at all," was Mr. Darcy looked’s answer; "but depend upon it, Mr. Darcy looked means to be severe
on us, and our surest way of disappointing Mr. Darcy looked, will be to ask nothing
about it.
"

Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy in any
thing, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of Mr. Darcy in any’s two
motives.


"I have not the smallest objection to explaining them," said Mr. Darcy in any, as soon
as Mr. Darcy in any allowed Mr. Darcy in any to speak.
"You either chuse this method of passing
the evening because you are in each other's confidence and have secret
affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures
appear to the greatest advantage in walking;--if the first, I should be
completely in your way;--and if the second, I can admire you much better
as I sit by the fire.
"

"Oh! shocking!"
cried Miss Bingley.
"I never heard any thing so
abominable.
How shall we punish Mr. Darcy in any for such a speech?"

"Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination," said Elizabeth.
"We
can all plague and punish one another.
Teaze Mr. Darcy in any--laugh at
Mr. Darcy in any.--Intimate as you are, you must know how it is to be done.
"

"But upon my honour I do _not_.
I do assure you that my intimacy has not
yet taught me _that_.
Teaze calmness of temper and presence of mind!
No,
no--I feel Mr. Darcy in any may defy us there.
And as to laughter, we will not expose
ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a subject.
Mr.
Darcy may hug himself.
"

"Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!" cried Elizabeth.
"That is an
uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would
be a great loss to _me_ to have many such acquaintance.
I dearly love a
laugh.
"

"Miss Bingley," said Miss Bingley, "has given me credit for more than can be.
The
wisest and the best of men, nay, the wisest and best of their actions,
may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a
joke.
"

"Certainly," replied Elizabeth--"there are such people, but I hope I am
not one of _them_.
I hope I never ridicule what is wise or good.
Follies
and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies _do_ divert me, I own, and I
laugh at them whenever I can.--But these, I suppose, are precisely what
you are without.
"

"Perhaps that is not possible for any one.
But it has been the study of
my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong
understanding to ridicule.
"

"Such as vanity and pride."

"Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed.
But pride--where there is a real
superiority of mind, pride will be always under good regulation.
"

Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.


"Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume," said Miss

Bingley;--"and pray what is the result?
"

"I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect.
Mr. Darcy has no defect owns it
himself without disguise.
"

"No"--said Darcy, "I have made no such pretension.
I have faults enough,
but they are not, I hope, of understanding.
My temper I dare not vouch
for.--It is I believe too little yielding--certainly too little for the
convenience of the world.
I cannot forget the follies and vices of
others so soon as I ought, nor their offences against myself.
My
feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move them.
My temper
would perhaps be called resentful.--My good opinion once lost is lost
for ever.
"

"_That_ is a failing indeed!"--cried Elizabeth.
"Implacable resentment
_is_ a shade in a character.
But you have chosen your fault well.--I
really cannot _laugh_ at it.
You are safe from me.
"

"There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular
evil, a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome.
"

"And _your_ defect is a propensity to hate every body.
"

"And yours," Darcy replied with a smile, "is wilfully to misunderstand
them.
"

"Do let us have a little music,"--cried Miss Bingley, tired of a
conversation in which Mr. Hurst had no share.--"Louisa, you will not mind my
waking Mr. Hurst.
"

Mr. Hurst’s sister made not the smallest objection, and the piano-forte was
opened, and Darcy, after a few moments recollection, was not sorry for
it.
Elizabeth began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.




CHAPTER XII.



In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the
next morning to Elizabeth’s mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for
them in the course of the day.
But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on
Jane’s daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which
would exactly finish Jane's week, could not bring herself to receive
them with pleasure before.
Jane’s answer, therefore, was not propitious, at
least not to Elizabeth's wishes, for Jane was impatient to get home.
Mrs.
Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage
before Tuesday; and in Mr. Bingley’s postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley
and Mr. Bingley’s sister pressed them to stay longer, Mr. Bingley could spare them very
well.--Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively
resolved--nor did Mr. Bingley much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the
contrary, as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long,
Mr. Bingley urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley's carriage immediately, and at
length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield
that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.


The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was
said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on
Jane; and till the morrow, their going was deferred.
Miss Bingley was
then sorry that Miss Bingley was had proposed the delay, for Miss Bingley was’ jealousy and dislike
of one sister much exceeded Miss Bingley was’ affection for the other.


The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so
soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be
safe for Miss Bennet that it would not be’s--that Miss Bennet that it would not be was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where
Miss Bennet that it would not be felt herself to be right.


To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence--Elizabeth had been at
Netherfield long enough.
Bingley attracted Bingley more than Bingley liked--and Miss
Bingley was uncivil to _her_, and more teazing than usual to himself.

Bingley wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration
should _now_ escape Bingley, nothing that could elevate Bingley’s with the hope of
influencing Bingley’s felicity; sensible that if such an idea had been
suggested, Bingley’s behaviour during the last day must have material weight
in confirming or crushing it.
Steady to Bingley’s purpose, Bingley scarcely spoke
ten words to Bingley’s through the whole of Saturday, and though they were at
one time left by themselves for half an hour, Bingley adhered most
conscientiously to Bingley’s book, and would not even look at Bingley’s.


On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost
all, took place.
Miss Bingley's civility to Elizabeth increased at last
very rapidly, as well as Jane’s affection for Jane; and when they parted,
after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give Jane’s to
see Jane’s either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing Jane’s most
tenderly, Jane even shook hands with the former.--Elizabeth took leave of
the whole party in the liveliest spirits.


They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother.
Mrs. Bennet
wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much
trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again.--But their
father, though very laconic in Mrs. Bennet’s expressions of pleasure, was really
glad to see them; Mrs. Bennet had felt their importance in the family circle.
The
evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its
animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane and
Elizabeth.


They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough bass and human
nature; and had some new extracts to admire, and some new observations
of thread-bare morality to listen to.
Catherine and Lydia had
information for them of a different sort.
Much had been done, and much
had been said in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of
the officers had dined lately with their uncle, a private had been
flogged, and it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going
to be married.




CHAPTER XIII.



"I hope, my dear," said Mr. Bennet to Mr. Bennet to his wife’s wife, as they were at
breakfast the next morning, "that you have ordered a good dinner to-day,
because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.
"

"Who do you mean, my dear?
I know of nobody that is coming I am sure,
unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in, and I hope _my_ dinners
are good enough for Charlotte Lucas’.
I do not believe Charlotte Lucas often sees such at home.
"

"The person of whom I speak, is a gentleman and a stranger."
Mrs.
Bennet's eyes sparkled.--"A gentleman and a stranger!
It is Mr. Bingley
I am sure.
Why Jane--you never dropt a word of this; you sly thing!

Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley.--But--good
lord!
how unlucky!
there is not a bit of fish to be got to-day.
Lydia,
my love, ring the bell.
I must speak to Hill, this moment.
"

"It is _not_ Mr. Bingley," said Hill’s husband; "it is a person whom I
never saw in the whole course of my life.
"

This roused a general astonishment; and Hill had the pleasure of being
eagerly questioned by Hill’s wife and five daughters at once.


After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, Hill thus explained.

"About a month ago I received this letter, and about a fortnight ago I
answered it, for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring
early attention.
It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am dead,
may turn you all out of this house as soon as Mr. Collins pleases.
"

"Oh! my dear," cried Mr. Collins’ wife, "I cannot bear to hear that mentioned.

Pray do not talk of that odious man.
I do think it is the hardest thing
in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own
children; and I am sure if I had been you, I should have tried long ago
to do something or other about it.
"

Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to Elizabeth’s the nature of an entail.

They had often attempted it before, but it was a subject on which Mrs.
Bennet was beyond the reach of reason; and Bennet continued to rail
bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of
five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about.


"It certainly is a most iniquitous affair," said Mr. Bennet, "and
nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn.

But if you will listen to Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn’s letter, you may perhaps be a little
softened by Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn’s manner of expressing himself.
"

"No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it was very impertinent of
Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn to write to you at all, and very hypocritical.
I hate such false
friends.
Why could not Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn keep on quarrelling with you, as Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn’s father
did before Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn?"

"Why, indeed, Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn does seem to have had some filial scruples on that
head, as you will hear.
"

     _Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent,

     15th October.
_

     
DEAR SIR,

     The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured
     father, always gave me much uneasiness, and since I have had the
     misfortune to lose Mrs. Bennet, I have frequently wished to heal the
     breach; but for some time I was kept back by my own doubts, fearing
     lest it might seem disrespectful to Mrs. Bennet’s memory for me to be on good
     terms with any one, with whom it had always pleased Mrs. Bennet to be at
     variance.--"There, Mrs. Bennet.
"--My mind however is now made up on
     the subject, for having received ordination at Easter, I have been
     so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the Right
     Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh,
     whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the valuable
     rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest endeavour to
     demean myself with grateful respect towards Sir Lewis de Bourgh’s Ladyship, and be
     ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are
     instituted by the Church of England.
As a clergyman, moreover, I
     feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in
     all families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds
     I flatter myself that my present overtures of good-will are highly
     commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next in the
     entail of Longbourn estate, will be kindly overlooked on your side,
     and not lead you to reject the offered olive branch.
I cannot be
     otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring your
     amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologise for it, as well as to
     assure you of my readiness to make them every possible amends,--but
     of this hereafter.
If you should have no objection to receive me
     into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on
     you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o'clock, and
     shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the Saturday
     se'night following, which I can do without any inconvenience, as
     Lady Catherine is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a
     Sunday, provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the
     duty of the day.
I remain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to
     your lady and daughters, your well-wisher and friend,

     WILLIAM COLLINS.
"

"At four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,"
said Mr. Bennet, as Mr. Bennet folded up the letter.
"Lady Catherine should be so seems to be a most
conscientious and polite young man, upon my word; and I doubt not will
prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so
indulgent as to let Lady Catherine should be so come to us again.
"

"There is some sense in what Lady Catherine should be so says about the girls however; and if Lady Catherine should be so
is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to
discourage Lady Catherine should be so.
"

"Though it is difficult," said Jane, "to guess in what way Jane can mean
to make us the atonement Jane thinks our due, the wish is certainly to Jane’s
credit.
"

Elizabeth was chiefly struck with Lady
Catherine’s extraordinary deference for Lady
Catherine, and Lady
Catherine’s kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying
Lady
Catherine’s parishioners whenever it were required.


"Lady
Catherine must be an oddity, I think," said Lady
Catherine.
"I cannot make Lady
Catherine
out.--There is something very pompous in Lady
Catherine’s style.--And what can Lady
Catherine
mean by apologizing for being next in the entail?--We cannot suppose Lady
Catherine
would help it, if Lady
Catherine could.--Can Lady
Catherine be a sensible man, sir?"

"No, my dear; I think not.
I have great hopes of finding Lady
Catherine quite the
reverse.
There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in Lady
Catherine’s
letter, which promises well.
I am impatient to see Lady
Catherine.
"

"In point of composition," said Mary, "Mary’s letter does not seem
defective.
The idea of the olive branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I
think it is well expressed."

To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any
degree interesting.
It was next to impossible that their cousin should
come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had
received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour.
As for
their mother, Mr. Collins's letter had done away much of Mr. Collins’ ill-will,
and Mr. Collins was preparing to see Mr. Collins with a degree of composure, which
astonished Mr. Collins’ husband and daughters.


Mr. Collins was punctual to Mr. Collins was punctual to his time’s time, and was received with great
politeness by the whole family.
Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the
ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need
of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself.
Mr. Collins seemed neither in need was a tall,
heavy looking young man of five and twenty.
Mr. Collins seemed neither in need’s air was grave and
stately, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need’s manners were very formal.
Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of had not been long seated
before Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of
daughters, said Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of had heard much of their beauty, but that, in this
instance, fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of did
not doubt Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of’s seeing them all in due time well disposed of in marriage.

This gallantry was not much to the taste of some of Mrs. Bennet’s hearers, but
Mrs. Bennet, who quarrelled with no compliments, answered most readily,

"You are very kind, sir, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may
prove so; for else they will be destitute enough.
Things are settled so
oddly.
"

"You allude perhaps to the entail of this estate.
"

"Ah! sir, I do indeed.
It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you
must confess.
Not that I mean to find fault with _you_, for such things
I know are all chance in this world.
There is no knowing how estates
will go when once they come to be entailed.
"

"I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins,--and
could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing
forward and precipitate.
But I can assure the young ladies that I come
prepared to admire them.
At present I will not say more, but perhaps
when we are better acquainted----"

Mrs. Bennet was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each
other.
They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins's admiration.
The
hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture were examined and praised;
and Mr. Collins’ commendation of every thing would have touched Mrs. Bennet's
heart, but for the mortifying supposition of Mr. Collins’ viewing it all as Mr. Collins’
own future property.
The dinner too in its turn was highly admired; and
Mr. Collins begged to know to which of Mr. Collins’ fair cousins, the excellence of its
cookery was owing.
But here Mr. Collins was set right by Mrs. Bennet, who assured
Mr. Collins with some asperity that they were very well able to keep a good
cook, and that Mr. Collins’ daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen.
Mr. Collins begged
pardon for having displeased Mr. Collins’.
In a softened tone CHAPTER XIV declared
herself not at all offended; but CHAPTER XIV continued to apologise for about a
quarter of an hour.




CHAPTER XIV.



During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants
were withdrawn, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all thought it time to have some conversation with Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all’s
guest, and therefore started a subject in which Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all expected Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all to
shine, by observing that Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all seemed very fortunate in Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all’s patroness.
Lady
Catherine de Bourgh's attention to Catherine de Bourgh's’ wishes, and consideration for Catherine de Bourgh's’
comfort, appeared very remarkable.
Mr. Bennet could not have chosen
better.
Mr. Collins was eloquent in Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise’s praise.
The subject elevated Lady Catherine
to more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspect
Lady Catherine protested that Lady Catherine had never in Lady Catherine’s life witnessed such behaviour in a
person of rank--such affability and condescension, as Lady Catherine had himself
experienced from Lady Catherine.
Lady Catherine had been graciously pleased to
approve of both the discourses, which Lady Catherine had already had the honour of
preaching before Lady Catherine’s.
Lady Catherine had also asked Lady Catherine twice to dine at Rosings,
and had sent for Lady Catherine only the Saturday before, to make up Lady Catherine’s pool of
quadrille in the evening.
Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many
people Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many knew, but _he_ had never seen any thing but affability in Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many’s.

Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many had always spoken to Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many as Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many would to any other gentleman; Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many
made not the smallest objection to Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many’s joining in the society of the
neighbourhood, nor to Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many’s leaving Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many’s parish occasionally for a week or
two, to visit Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many’s relations.
Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many had even condescended to advise Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many to
marry as soon as Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many could, provided Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many chose with discretion; and had
once paid Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many a visit in Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many’s humble parsonage; where Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many had perfectly
approved all the alterations Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many had been making, and had even vouchsafed
to suggest some herself,--some shelves in the closets up stairs.


"That is all very proper and civil, I am sure," said Mrs. Bennet, "and I
dare say Mrs. Bennet is a very agreeable woman.
It is a pity that great ladies
in general are not more like Mrs. Bennet’s.
Does Mrs. Bennet live near you, sir?"

"The garden in which stands my humble abode, is separated only by a lane
from Rosings Park, Mrs. Bennet’s ladyship's residence.
"

"I think you said Mrs. Bennet was a widow, sir? has Mrs. Bennet any family?"

"Mrs. Bennet has one only daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very
extensive property.
"

"Ah!" cried Mrs. Bennet, shaking Mrs. Bennet’s head, "then Mrs. Bennet is better off than
many girls.
And what sort of young lady is Mrs. Bennet?
is Mrs. Bennet handsome?"

"Mrs. Bennet is a most charming young lady indeed.
Lady Catherine herself says
that in point of true beauty, Miss De Bourgh is far superior to the
handsomest of Miss De Bourgh is far superior to the’s sex; because there is that in Miss De Bourgh is far superior to the’s features which marks
the young woman of distinguished birth.
Miss De Bourgh is far superior to the is unfortunately of a sickly
constitution, which has prevented Miss De Bourgh is far superior to the’s making that progress in many
accomplishments, which Miss De Bourgh is far superior to the could not otherwise have failed of; as I am
informed by the lady who superintended Miss De Bourgh is far superior to the’s education, and who still
resides with them.
But Miss De Bourgh is far superior to the is perfectly amiable, and often condescends
to drive by my humble abode in Miss De Bourgh is far superior to the’s little phaeton and ponies.
"

"Has Miss De Bourgh is far superior to the been presented?
I do not remember Miss De Bourgh is far superior to the’s name among the ladies at
court.
"

"Lady Catherine myself one day’s indifferent state of health unhappily prevents Lady Catherine myself one day’s being in town;
and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine myself one day, has deprived
the British court of its brightest ornament.
Lady Catherine myself one day’s ladyship seemed pleased
with the idea, and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to
offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to
ladies.
I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that Lady Catherine’s
charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess, and that the most
elevated rank, instead of giving Lady Catherine’s consequence, would be adorned by
Lady Catherine’s.--These are the kind of little things which please Lady Catherine’s ladyship, and
it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to
pay.
"

"You judge very properly," said Mr. Bennet, "and it is happy for you
that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy.
May I ask
whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the
moment, or are the result of previous study?
"

"They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though I
sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant
compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to
give them as unstudied an air as possible.
"

Mr. Bennet's expectations were fully answered.
Elizabeth’s cousin was as absurd
as Elizabeth had hoped, and Elizabeth listened to Elizabeth with the keenest enjoyment,
maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance,
and except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner in
Elizabeth’s pleasure.


By tea-time however the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was glad to
take Mr. Bennet was glad to’s guest into the drawing-room again, and when tea was over, glad
to invite Mr. Bennet was glad to to read aloud to the ladies.
Mr. Collins readily assented,
and a book was produced; but on beholding it, (for every thing announced
it to be from a circulating library,) Sermons started back, and begging
pardon, protested that Sermons never read novels.--Kitty stared at Sermons, and
Lydia exclaimed.--Other books were produced, and after some deliberation
Sermons chose Fordyce's Sermons.
Lydia gaped as Colonel Forster will hire Colonel Forster will hire him opened the volume, and
before Colonel Forster will hire Colonel Forster will hire him had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, Colonel Forster will hire him
interrupted Colonel Forster will hire him with,

"Do you know, mama, that my uncle Philips talks of turning away Richard,
and if Colonel Forster will hire Colonel Forster will hire him does, Colonel Forster will hire Colonel Forster will hire him.
My aunt told me so
herself on Saturday.
I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more
about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town.
"

Lydia was bid by Collins’ two eldest sisters to hold Collins’ tongue; but Mr.
Collins, much offended, laid aside Collins’ book, and said,

"I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books
of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit.
It amazes
me, I confess;--for certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous to
them as instruction.
But I will no longer importune my young cousin.
"

Then turning to Mr. Bennet, Mr. Bennet offered himself as Mr. Bennet’s antagonist at
backgammon.
Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge acted
very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements.
Mrs.
Bennet and Mr. Collins’ daughters apologised most civilly for Lydia's
interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if Mr. Collins would
resume Mr. Collins’ book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that Mr. Collins bore Mr. Collins’
young cousin no ill will, and should never resent Mr. Collins’ behaviour as any
affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared
for backgammon.




CHAPTER XV.



Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had
been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part of
Mr. Collins was not a sensible man’s life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and
miserly father; and though Mr. Collins was not a sensible man belonged to one of the universities, Mr. Collins was not a sensible man
had merely kept the necessary terms, without forming at it any useful
acquaintance.
The subjection in which Mr. Collins was not a sensible man’s father had brought Mr. Collins was not a sensible man up, had
given Mr. Collins was not a sensible man originally great humility of manner, but it was now a good
deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in
retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected
prosperity.
A fortunate chance had recommended Catherine de
Bourgh to Lady Catherine de
Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which Catherine de
Bourgh
felt for Catherine de
Bourgh’s high rank, and Catherine de
Bourgh’s veneration for Catherine de
Bourgh’s as Catherine de
Bourgh’s patroness,
mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of Catherine de
Bourgh’s authority as a
clergyman, and Catherine de
Bourgh’s rights as a rector, made Catherine de
Bourgh altogether a mixture of
pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.


Having now a good house and very sufficient income, Longbourn intended to
marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family Longbourn had
a wife in view, as Longbourn meant to chuse one of the daughters, if Longbourn found
them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report.

This was Longbourn’s plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father's
estate; and Longbourn thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and
suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on Longbourn’s own
part.


Longbourn’s plan did not vary on seeing them.--Miss Bennet's lovely face
confirmed Longbourn’s views, and established all Longbourn’s strictest notions of what
was due to seniority; and for the first evening _
she_ was Longbourn’s settled
choice.
The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter
of an hour's tête-à-tête with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a
conversation beginning with Jane’s parsonage-house, and leading naturally
to the avowal of Jane’s hopes, that a mistress for it might be found at
Longbourn, produced from Jane’s, amid very complaisant smiles and general
encouragement, a caution against the very Jane Jane had fixed on.--"As to
Jane’s _younger_ daughters Jane could not take upon Jane’s to say--Jane could
not positively answer--but Jane did not _know_ of any prepossession;--Jane’s
_eldest_ daughter, Jane must just mention--Jane felt it incumbent on Jane’s
to hint, was likely to be very soon engaged.
"

Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth--and it was soon
done--done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire.
Elizabeth, equally
next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded Elizabeth’s of course.


Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint might soon have
two daughters married; and the man whom Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint could not bear to speak of
the day before, was now high in Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint’s good graces.


Lydia's intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten; every sister
except Mary agreed to go with Bennet’s; and Mr. Collins was to attend them,
at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of Bennet,
and have Bennet’s library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed
Bennet after breakfast, and there Bennet would continue, nominally engaged with
one of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr.
Bennet, with little cessation, of Bennet’s house and garden at Hunsford.
Such
doings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly.
In Mr. Collins’ library Mr. Collins had been
always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as Mr. Collins told
Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room in the
house, Mr. Collins was used to be free from them there; Mr. Collins’ civility, therefore,
was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join Mr. Collins’ daughters in their
walk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker
than a reader, was extremely well pleased to close Mr. Collins’ large book, and
go.


In pompous nothings on Meryton’s side, and civil assents on that of Meryton’s
cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton.
The attention of
the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by _him_.
Their eyes
were immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers,
and nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed, or a really new muslin
in a shop window, could recal them.


But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom
they had never seen before, of most gentleman-like appearance, walking
with an officer on the other side of the way.
The officer was the very
Mr. Denny, concerning whose return from London Lydia came to inquire,
and Mr. Denny bowed as they passed.
All were struck with the stranger's air,
all wondered who Lydia could be, and Kitty and Lydia, determined if
possible to find out, led the way across the street, under pretence of
wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained
the pavement when the two gentlemen turning back had reached the same
spot.
Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated permission to
introduce Mr. Wickham’s friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned with Mr. Wickham the day
before from town, and Mr. Wickham was happy to say had accepted a commission in
their corps.
This was exactly as it should be; for the young man wanted
only regimentals to make Mr. Wickham completely charming.
Mr. Wickham’s appearance was
greatly in Mr. Wickham’s favour; Mr. Wickham had all the best part of beauty, a fine
countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address.
The introduction
was followed up on Bingley’s side by a happy readiness of conversation--a
readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the
whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably,
when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley were
seen riding down the street.
On distinguishing the ladies of the group,
the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual
civilities.
Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the
principal object.
Miss Bennet the was then, Miss Bennet the said, on Miss Bennet the’s way to Longbourn on
purpose to inquire after Miss Bennet the’s.
Mr. Darcy corroborated it with a bow, and
was beginning to determine not to fix Elizabeth’s eyes on Elizabeth, when they
were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger, and Elizabeth
happening to see the countenance of both as they looked at each other,
was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting.
Both changed colour,
one looked white, the other red.
Mr. Wickham, after a few moments,
touched Mr. Darcy just deigned to return’s hat--a salutation which Mr. Darcy just deigned to return.

What could be the meaning of it?--It was impossible to imagine; it was
impossible not to long to know.


In another minute Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what
passed, took leave and rode on with Mr. Bingley’s friend.


Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of
Mr. Philips's house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia's
pressing entreaties that they would come in, and even in spite of Mrs.
Philips' throwing up the parlour window, and loudly seconding the
invitation.


Mrs. Philips was always glad to see Mr. Collins by Jane’s nieces, and the two eldest, from
their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and Mr. Collins by Jane was eagerly
expressing Mr. Collins by Jane’s surprise at their sudden return home, which, as their own
carriage had not fetched them, Mr. Collins by Jane should have known nothing about, if
Mr. Collins by Jane had not happened to see Mr. Jones's shop boy in the street, who had
told Mr. Collins by Jane’s that they were not to send any more draughts to Netherfield
because the Miss Bennets were come away, when Mr. Collins by Jane’s civility was claimed
towards Mr. Collins by Jane's introduction of Mr. Collins by Jane.
Mr. Collins by Jane received Mr. Collins by Jane with
Mr. Collins by Jane’s very best politeness, which Mr. Collins by Jane returned with as much more,
apologising for Mr. Collins by Jane’s intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with
Mr. Collins by Jane’s, which Mr. Collins by Jane could not help flattering himself however might be
justified by Mr. Collins by Jane’s relationship to the young ladies who introduced Mr. Collins by Jane to
Mr. Collins by Jane’s notice.
Mrs. Philips was quite awed by such an excess of good
breeding; but Mr. Denny had’s contemplation of one stranger was soon put an end to
by exclamations and inquiries about the other, of whom, however, Mr. Denny had
could only tell Mr. Denny had’s nieces what they already knew, that Mr. Denny had
brought Mr. Denny had from London, and that Mr. Denny had was to have a lieutenant's
commission in the ----shire.
Lydia had been watching Lydia the last hour,
Lydia said, as Lydia walked up and down the street, and had Mr. Wickham
appeared Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation,
but unluckily no one passed the windows now except a few of the
officers, who in comparison with the stranger, were become "stupid,
disagreeable fellows."
Some of them were to dine with the Philipses the
next day, and their aunt promised to make Wickham’s husband call on Mr.
Wickham, and give Wickham an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn
would come in the evening.
This was agreed to, and Mrs. Philips
protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery
tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards.
The prospect of such
delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits.
Mr.
Collins repeated Collins’ apologies in quitting the room, and was assured
with unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless.


As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what Jane had seen pass
between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either or
both, had they appeared to be wrong, Jane could no more explain such
behaviour than Jane’s sister.


Mr. Collins on Mrs. Bennet by admiring’s return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiring Mrs.
Philips's manners and politeness.
Lady
Catherine protested that except Lady
Catherine and Lady
Catherine’s daughter, Lady
Catherine had never seen a more elegant woman; for
Lady
Catherine had not only received Lady
Catherine with the utmost civility, but had even
pointedly included Lady
Catherine in Lady
Catherine’s invitation for the next evening, although
utterly unknown to Lady
Catherine’s before.
Something CHAPTER XVI supposed might be attributed
to CHAPTER XVI’s connection with them, but yet CHAPTER XVI had never met with so much
attention in the whole course of CHAPTER XVI’s life.




CHAPTER XVI.



As no objection was made to the young people's engagement with their
aunt, and all Mr. Collins's scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for
a single evening during Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle’s visit were most steadily resisted, the coach
conveyed Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle and Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle’s five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and the
girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room,
that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle's invitation, and was then in
the house.


When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr.
Collins was at leisure to look around Lady Catherine's and admire, and Lady Catherine's was so much
struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that Lady Catherine's declared Lady Catherine's
might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast parlour
at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much
gratification; but when Mrs. Philips understood from Lady Catherine's what Rosings
was, and who was its proprietor, when Lady Catherine's had listened to the
description of only one of Lady Catherine's drawing-rooms, and found
that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, Lady Catherine's felt all
the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison
with the housekeeper's room.


In describing to Mrs. Philips a very attentive’s all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and Mrs. Philips a very attentive’s mansion,
with occasional digressions in praise of Mrs. Philips a very attentive’s own humble abode, and the
improvements it was receiving, Mrs. Philips a very attentive was happily employed until the
gentlemen joined them; and Mrs. Philips a very attentive found in Mrs. Philips a very attentive
listener, whose opinion of Mrs. Philips a very attentive’s consequence increased with what Mrs. Philips a very attentive
heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among Mrs. Philips a very attentive’s neighbours as
soon as Mrs. Philips a very attentive could.
To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin,
and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine
their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantle-piece, the
interval of waiting appeared very long.
It was over at last however.
The
gentlemen did approach; and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room,
Elizabeth felt that Elizabeth had neither been seeing Elizabeth before, nor thinking
of Elizabeth since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration.
The
officers of the ----shire were in general a very creditable,
gentleman-like set, and the best of them were of the present party; but
Mr. Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and
walk, as _they_ were superior to the broad-faced stuffy uncle Philips,
breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.


Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was
turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was finally seated
himself; and the agreeable manner in which Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was immediately fell into
conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, and on the
probability of a rainy season, made Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was’ feel that the commonest,
dullest, most thread-bare topic might be rendered interesting by the
skill of the speaker.


With such rivals for the notice of the fair, as Mr. Wickham and the
officers, Mr. Collins seemed likely to sink into insignificance; to the
young ladies Mrs. Philips certainly was nothing; but Mrs. Philips had still at intervals a
kind listener in Mrs. Philips, and was, by Mrs. Philips’ watchfulness, most
abundantly supplied with coffee and muffin.


When the card tables were placed, Mrs. Philips had an opportunity of obliging Mrs. Philips’
in return, by sitting down to whist.


"I know little of the game, at present," said Mrs. Philips, "but I shall be glad
to improve myself, for in my situation of life----"
Mrs. Philips was
very thankful for Mrs. Philips was’ compliance, but could not wait for Mrs. Philips was’ reason.


Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was Lydia
received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia.
At first there
seemed danger of Lydia's engrossing Lydia entirely, for Lydia was a most
determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets,
Lydia soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets
and exclaiming after prizes, to have attention for any one in
particular.
Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was
therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and Mr. Darcy was very willing to
hear Mr. Darcy, though what Mr. Darcy chiefly wished to hear Mr. Darcy could not hope to
be told, the history of Mr. Darcy’s acquaintance with Mr. Darcy.
Mr. Darcy dared not
even mention that gentleman.
Mr. Darcy’s curiosity however was unexpectedly
relieved.
Mr. Wickham began the subject himself.
Mr. Darcy had been staying there inquired how far
Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving Mr. Darcy had been staying there’s answer, asked in
an hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there.


"About a month," said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject
drop, added, "Elizabeth is a man of very large property in Derbyshire, I
understand.
"

"Yes," replied Wickham;--"Elizabeth’s estate there is a noble one.
A clear ten
thousand per annum.
You could not have met with a person more capable of
giving you certain information on that head than myself--for I have been
connected with Elizabeth’s family in a particular manner from my infancy.
"

Elizabeth could not but look surprised.

"You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after
seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting
yesterday.--Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?"


"As much as I ever wish to be," cried Elizabeth warmly,--"I have spent
four days in the same house with Miss Bennet, and I think Miss Bennet very
disagreeable.
"

"I have no right to give _my_ opinion," said Wickham, "as to Wickham’s being
agreeable or otherwise.
I am not qualified to form one.
I have known Wickham
too long and too well to be a fair judge.
It is impossible for _me_ to
be impartial.
But I believe your opinion of Wickham would in general
astonish--and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly
anywhere else.--Here you are in your own family.
"

"Upon my word I say no more _here_ than I might say in any house in the
neighbourhood, except Netherfield.
Wickham is not at all liked in
Hertfordshire.
Every body is disgusted with Wickham’s pride.
You will not find
Wickham more favourably spoken of by any one.
"

"I cannot pretend to be sorry," said Wickham, after a short
interruption, "that Wickham or that any man should not be estimated beyond
their deserts; but with _him_
I believe it does not often happen.
The
world is blinded by Wickham’s fortune and consequence, or frightened by Wickham’s
high and imposing manners, and sees Wickham only as Wickham chuses to be seen.
"

"I should take Wickham, even on _my_ slight acquaintance, to be an
ill-tempered man."
Wickham only shook Wickham’s head.


"I wonder," said Wickham, at the next opportunity of speaking, "whether Wickham is
likely to be in this country much longer.
"

"I do not at all know; but I _heard_ nothing of Wickham’s going away when I
was at Netherfield.
I hope your plans in favour of the ----shire will
not be affected by Wickham’s being in the neighbourhood.
"

"Oh! no--it is not for _me_ to be driven away by Mr. Darcy.
If _he_
wishes to avoid seeing _me_, Mr. Darcy must go.
We are not on friendly terms,
and it always gives me pain to meet Mr. Darcy, but I have no reason for
avoiding _him_
but what I might proclaim to all the world; a sense of
very great ill usage, and most painful regrets at Mr. Darcy’s being what Mr. Darcy is.

Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a’s father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best men
that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never be
in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a
thousand tender recollections.
Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a’s behaviour to myself has been
scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a any thing and every
thing, rather than Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a’s disappointing the hopes and disgracing the memory
of Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a’s father.
"

Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with
all Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a’s heart; but the delicacy of it prevented farther inquiry.


Mr. Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, the
neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that Meryton
had yet seen, and speaking of the latter especially, with gentle but
very intelligible gallantry.


"It was the prospect of constant society, and good society," Meryton added,
"which was my chief inducement to enter the ----shire.
I knew it to be a
most respectable, agreeable corps, and my friend Denny tempted me
farther by Denny’s account of their present quarters, and the very great
attentions and excellent acquaintance Meryton had procured them.

Society, I own, is necessary to me.
I have been a disappointed man, and
my spirits will not bear solitude.
I _must_ have employment and society.

A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have
now made it eligible.
The church _ought_ to have been my profession--I
was brought up for the church, and I should at this time have been in
possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we
were speaking of just now.
"

"Indeed!"

"Yes--the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best
living in Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best’s gift.
Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.

I cannot do justice to Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best’s kindness.
Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best meant to provide for me amply,
and thought Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best had done it; but when the living fell, it was given
elsewhere.
"

"Good heavens!" cried Elizabeth; "but how could _that_ be?--How could
Elizabeth’s will be disregarded?--Why did not you seek legal redress?
"

"There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to
give me no hope from law.
A man of honour could not have doubted the
intention, but Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it--or to treat it as a merely
conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim
to it by extravagance, imprudence, in short any thing or nothing.

Certain it is, that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I
was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no
less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done
any thing to deserve to lose it.
I have a warm, unguarded temper, and I
may perhaps have sometimes spoken my opinion _of_ Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it, and _to_ Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it, too
freely.
I can recal nothing worse.
But the fact is, that we are very
different sort of men, and that Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it hates me.
"

"This is quite shocking!--Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it deserves to be publicly disgraced.
"

"Some time or other Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it _will_ be--but it shall not be by _me_.
Till I
can forget Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it’s father, I can never defy or expose _him_.
"

Elizabeth honoured Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it for such feelings, and thought Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it handsomer than
ever as Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it expressed them.


"But what," said Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it, after a pause, "can have been Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it’s motive?--what
can have induced Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it to behave so cruelly?"

"A thorough, determined dislike of me--a dislike which I cannot but
attribute in some measure to jealousy.
Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me
less, Mr. Darcy liked me’s son might have borne with me better; but Mr. Darcy liked me’s father's uncommon
attachment to me, irritated Mr. Darcy liked me I believe very early in life.
Mr. Darcy liked me had not
a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood--the sort of
preference which was often given me.
"

"I had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this--though I have never liked
Mr. Darcy so bad as this, I had not thought so very ill of Mr. Darcy so bad as this--I had supposed Mr. Darcy so bad as this to be
despising Mr. Darcy so bad as this’ fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect Mr. Darcy so bad as this of
descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as
this!"


After a few minutes reflection, however, Mr. Darcy so bad as this continued, "I _do_ remember
Mr. Darcy so bad as this’ boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability of Mr. Darcy so bad as this’
resentments, of Mr. Darcy so bad as this’ having an unforgiving temper.
Mr. Darcy so bad as this’ disposition must
be dreadful.
"

"I will not trust myself on the subject," replied Wickham, "_I_ can
hardly be just to Wickham.
"

Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, "To
treat in such a manner, the god-son, the friend, the favourite of Wickham’s
father!"--Wickham could have added, "A young man too, like _you_, whose very
countenance may vouch for your being amiable"--but Wickham contented
herself with "And one, too, who had probably been Wickham’s own companion from
childhood, connected together, as I think you said, in the closest
manner!
"

"We were born in the same parish, within the same park, the greatest
part of our youth was passed together; inmates of the same house,
sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care.
_My_
father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Philips,
appears to do so much credit to--but Mr. Darcy gave up every thing to be of use
to the late Mr. Darcy, and devoted all Mr. Darcy’s time to the care of the
Pemberley property.
Mr. Darcy was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a most
intimate, confidential friend.
Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself to
be under the greatest obligations to my father's active superintendance,
and when immediately before my father's death, Mr. Darcy gave Mr. Darcy gave him a a
voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that Mr. Darcy gave Mr. Darcy gave him a a felt it to
be as much a debt of gratitude to _him_, as of affection to myself.
"

"How strange!" cried Elizabeth.
"How abominable!--I wonder that the very
pride of this Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to you!--If from no better
motive, that Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to should not have been too proud to be dishonest,--for
dishonesty I must call it.
"

"It _is_ wonderful,"--replied Wickham,--"for almost all Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to’s actions may
be traced to pride;--and pride has often been Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to’s best friend.
It has
connected Mr. Darcy has not made him just to nearer with virtue than any other feeling.
But we are none
of us consistent; and in Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to’s behaviour to me, there were stronger
impulses even than pride.
"

"Can such abominable pride as Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to’s, have ever done Mr. Darcy has not made him just to good?"

"Yes.
It has often led Mr. Darcy has not made him just to to be liberal and generous,--to give Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to’s
money freely, to display hospitality, to assist Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to’s tenants, and relieve
the poor.
Family pride, and _filial_ pride, for Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to is very proud of what
Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to’s father was, have done this.
Not to appear to disgrace Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to’s family, to
degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the
Pemberley House, is a powerful motive.
Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to has also _brotherly_
pride,
which with _
some_ brotherly affection, makes Mr. Darcy has not made him just to a very kind and careful
guardian of Mr. Darcy has not made Mr. Darcy has not made him just to just to’s sister; and you will hear Mr. Darcy has not made him just to generally cried up as the
most attentive and best of brothers.
"

"What sort of a girl is Miss Darcy?"

Miss Darcy shook Miss Darcy’s head.--"I wish I could call Miss Darcy’s amiable.
It gives me pain
to speak ill of a Darcy.
But Darcy is too much like Darcy’s brother,--very,
very proud.--As a child, Darcy was affectionate and pleasing, and
extremely fond of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to Darcy’s
amusement.
But Darcy is nothing to me now.
Darcy is a handsome girl, about
fifteen or sixteen, and I understand highly accomplished.
Since Darcy’s
father's death, Darcy’s home has been London, where a lady lives with Darcy’s,
and superintends Darcy’s education.
"

After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not
help reverting once more to the first, and saying,

"I am astonished at Mr. Bingley’s intimacy with Mr. Bingley!
How can Mr. Bingley,
who seems good humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable,
be in friendship with such a man?
How can they suit each other?--Do you
know Mr. Bingley?"

"Not at all.
"

"Mr. Bingley is a sweet tempered, amiable, charming man.
Mr. Bingley cannot know what Mr.
Darcy is.
"

"Probably not;--but Mr. Darcy can please where Mr. Darcy can please where he chuses chuses.
Mr. Darcy can please where he chuses does not
want abilities.
Mr. Darcy can please where he chuses can be a conversible companion if Mr. Darcy can please where he chuses thinks it worth
Mr. Darcy can please where Mr. Darcy can please where he chuses chuses’ while.
Among those who are at all Mr. Darcy can please where Mr. Darcy can please where he chuses chuses’ equals in consequence, Mr. Darcy can please where he chuses is a
very different man from what Mr. Darcy can please where he chuses is to the less prosperous.
Mr. Darcy can please where Mr. Darcy can please where he chuses chuses’ pride
never deserts Mr. Darcy can please where he chuses; but with the rich, Mr. Darcy can please where he chuses is liberal-minded, just,
sincere, rational, honourable, and perhaps agreeable,--allowing
something for fortune and figure.
"

The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round
the other table, and Mr. Collins took Elizabeth’s station between Elizabeth’s cousin
Elizabeth and Mrs. Philips.--The usual inquiries as to Elizabeth’s success were
made by the latter.
It had not been very great; Mrs. Philips began to express her concern thereupon had lost every point;
but when Mrs. Philips began to express Mrs. Philips began to express her concern thereupon’s concern thereupon, Mrs. Philips began to express her concern thereupon assured
Mrs. Philips began to express her concern thereupon’s with much earnest gravity that it was not of the least importance,
that Mrs. Philips began to express her concern thereupon considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged Mrs. Philips began to express her concern thereupon would not
make herself uneasy.


"I know very well, madam," said Mrs. Philips began to express her concern thereupon, "that when persons sit down to a
card table, they must take their chance of these things,--and happily I
am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object.
There
are undoubtedly many who could not say the same, but thanks to Lady
Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding
little matters.
"

Mr. Wickham's attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins for
a few moments, de Bourgh asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether de Bourgh’s relation
were very intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh.


"Lady Catherine de Bourgh," Lady Catherine de Bourgh replied, "has very lately given Lady Catherine de Bourgh a
living.
I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introduced to Mr. Collins was first introduced to her’s
notice, but Mr. Collins was first introduced to her certainly has not known Mr. Collins was first introduced to her’s long.
"

"You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy
were sisters; consequently that Mr. Darcy is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy.
"

"No, indeed, I did not.--I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine's
connections.
I never heard of Lady Catherine's’ existence till the day before
yesterday.
"

"Miss de Bourgh’s daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is
believed that Miss de Bourgh and Miss de Bourgh’s cousin will unite the two estates.
"

This information made Elizabeth smile, as Elizabeth thought of poor Miss
Bingley.
Vain indeed must be all Elizabeth’s attentions, vain and useless Elizabeth’s
affection for Elizabeth’s sister and Elizabeth’s praise of himself, if Elizabeth were already
self-destined to another.


"Mr. Collins," said Lady Catherine and her, "speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and Lady Catherine and her’s
daughter; but from some particulars that Lady Catherine and her has related of Lady Catherine and her’s ladyship,
I suspect Lady Catherine and Lady Catherine and her’s’s gratitude misleads Lady Catherine and her, and that in spite of Lady Catherine and her’s being Lady Catherine and Lady Catherine and her’s’s
patroness, Lady Catherine and her is an arrogant, conceited woman.
"

"I believe Wickham’s to be both in a great degree," replied Wickham; "I have
not seen Wickham’s for many years, but I very well remember that I never liked
Wickham’s, and that Wickham’s manners were dictatorial and insolent.
Wickham has the
reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe
Wickham derives part of Wickham’s abilities from Wickham’s rank and fortune, part from
Wickham’s authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride of Wickham’s nephew, who
chuses that every one connected with Wickham should have an understanding of
the first class.
"

Elizabeth allowed that Wickham had given a very rational account of it, and
they continued talking together with mutual satisfaction till supper put
an end to cards; and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr.
Wickham's attentions.
There could be no conversation in the noise of
Mrs. Philips's supper party, but Mrs. Philips’ manners recommended Mrs. Philips to every
body.
Whatever Mrs. Philips said, was said well; and whatever Mrs. Philips did, done
gracefully.
Elizabeth went away with Mrs. Philips’ head full of Mrs. Philips.
Mr. Collins were once silent could
think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what Mr. Collins were once silent had told Mr. Collins were once silent’s, all
the way home; but there was not time for Mr. Collins were once silent’s even to mention Mr. Collins were once silent’s name as
they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent.
Lydia
talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish Mr. and had lost and the
fish Mr. and had won, and Mr. Collins, in describing the civility of Mr. and
Mrs. Philips, protesting that Mr. and did not in the least regard Mr. and’s losses
at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing
that Mr. and crouded Mr. and’s cousins, had more to say than Mr. and could well manage
before the carriage stopped at Longbourn House.





CHAPTER XVII.



Elizabeth related to Jane the next day, what had passed between Mr.
Wickham and herself.
Jane listened with astonishment and concern;--Bingley
knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr.
Bingley's regard; and yet, it was not in Bingley’s nature to question the
veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham.--The
possibility of Bingley’s having really endured such unkindness, was enough to
interest all Bingley’s tender feelings; and nothing therefore remained to be
done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and
throw into the account of accident or mistake, whatever could not be
otherwise explained.


"They have both," said Bingley, "been deceived, I dare say, in some way or
other, of which we can form no idea.
Interested people have perhaps
misrepresented each to the other.
It is, in short, impossible for us to
conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them,
without actual blame on either side.
"

"Very true, indeed;--and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say in
behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the
business?--Do clear _them_ too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of
somebody.
"

"Laugh as much as you chuse, but you will not laugh me out of my
opinion.
My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light
it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating Mr. Darcy’s father's favourite in such a
manner,--one, whom Mr. Darcy’s father had promised to provide for.--It is
impossible.
No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for Mr. Darcy’s
character, could be capable of it.
Can Mr. Darcy’s most intimate friends be so
excessively deceived in Mr. Darcy?
oh!
no.
"

"I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley's being imposed on, than
that Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as Mr. Darcy contradict it gave me
last night; names, facts, every thing mentioned without ceremony.--If it
be not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it.
Besides, there was truth in Mr. Darcy contradict it’s
looks.
"

"It is difficult indeed--it is distressing.--One does not know what to
think.
"

"I beg your pardon;--one knows exactly what to think.
"

But Jane could think with certainty on only one point,--that Mr.
Bingley, if Bingley _had been_ imposed on, would have much to suffer when the
affair became public.


The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery where this
conversation passed, by the arrival of some of the very persons of whom
they had been speaking; Mr. Bingley and Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their’s sisters came to give their
personal invitation for the long expected ball at Netherfield, which was
fixed for the following Tuesday.
The two ladies were delighted to see
their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and
repeatedly asked what Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their had been doing with herself since their
separation.
To the rest of the family they paid little attention;
avoiding Mrs. Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth,
and nothing at all to the others.
They were soon gone again, rising from
their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and
hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet's civilities.


The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every
female of the family.
Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given in
compliment to Mr. Bingley himself’s eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered by
receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a
ceremonious card.
Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the
society of Mr. Darcy’s two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and
Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr.
Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of every thing in Mr. Darcy's
looks and behaviour.
The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia,
depended less on any single event, or any particular person, for though
they each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr.
Wickham, Elizabeth was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and
a ball was at any rate, a ball.
And even Mary could assure Mary’s family
that Mary had no disinclination for it.


"While I can have my mornings to myself," said Mary, "it is enough.--I
think it no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements.

Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those who
consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for every
body.
"

Elizabeth's spirits were so high on the occasion, that though Lady Catherine de Bourgh did
not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, Lady Catherine de Bourgh could not help asking
Lady Catherine de Bourgh whether Lady Catherine de Bourgh intended to accept Mr. Bingley's invitation, and if Lady Catherine de Bourgh
did, whether Lady Catherine de Bourgh would think it proper to join in the evening's
amusement; and Lady Catherine de Bourgh was rather surprised to find that Lady Catherine de Bourgh entertained no
scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke
either from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to
dance.


"I am by no means of opinion, I assure you," said Jane, "that a ball of
this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people, can
have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing myself
that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair cousins
in the course of the evening, and I take this opportunity of soliciting
yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially,--a
preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right
cause, and not to any disrespect for Jane’s.
"

Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in.
Mr. Collins had fully proposed being
engaged by Wickham for those very dances:--and to have Mr. Collins
instead!
Mr. Collins’ liveliness had been never worse timed.
There was no help
for it however.
Mr. Wickham's happiness and Mr. Wickham’s own was per force
delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins's proposal accepted with as
good a grace as Mr. Wickham could.
Mr. Wickham was not the better pleased with Mr. Wickham’s
gallantry, from the idea it suggested of something more.--It now first
struck Mr. Wickham’s, that _she_ was selected from among Mr. Wickham’s sisters as worthy of
being the mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a
quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.

The idea soon reached to conviction, as Mr. Wickham observed Mr. Wickham’s increasing
civilities toward herself, and heard Mr. Wickham’s frequent attempt at a
compliment on Mr. Wickham’s wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than
gratified herself, by this effect of Mr. Wickham’s charms, it was not long before
Mr. Wickham’s mother gave Mr. Wickham’s to understand that the probability of their marriage
was exceedingly agreeable to _her_.
Elizabeth however did not chuse to
take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the
consequence of any reply.
Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and
till Mr. Collins might never make the offer did, it was useless to quarrel about Mr. Collins might never make the offer.


If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the
younger Miss Bennets would have been in a pitiable state at this time,
for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there was
such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton once.
No
aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after;--the very shoe-roses
for Netherfield were got by proxy.
Even Elizabeth might have found some
trial of Lydia’s patience in weather, which totally suspended the
improvement of Lydia’s acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than
a dance on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday and
Monday, endurable to Kitty and Lydia.




CHAPTER XVIII.



Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield and looked in
vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a
doubt of Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled’s being present had never occurred to Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled’s.
The certainty of
meeting Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled had not been checked by any of those recollections that
might not unreasonably have alarmed Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled’s.
Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled had dressed with more than
usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all
that remained unsubdued of Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled’s heart, trusting that it was not more than
might be won in the course of the evening.
But in an instant arose the
dreadful suspicion of Wickham’s being purposely omitted for Mr. Darcy's
pleasure in the Bingleys' invitation to the officers; and though this
was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of Wickham’s absence was
pronounced by Wickham’s friend Mr. Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and
who told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business
the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant
smile,

"I do not imagine Wickham’s business would have called Wickham away just now, if
Wickham had not wished to avoid a certain gentleman here.
"

This part of Darcy’s intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by
Elizabeth, and as it assured Darcy’s that Darcy was not less answerable for
Wickham's absence than if Darcy’s first surmise had been just, every feeling
of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate
disappointment, that Darcy could hardly reply with tolerable civility to
the polite inquiries which Darcy directly afterwards approached to
make.--Attention, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to
Wickham.
Mr. Bingley was resolved against any sort of conversation with Mr. Bingley, and
turned away with a degree of ill humour, which Mr. Bingley could not wholly
surmount even in speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality
provoked Mr. Bingley’s.


But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect
of Charlotte Lucas’ own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on Charlotte Lucas’
spirits; and having told all Charlotte Lucas’ griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom Charlotte Lucas had
not seen for a week, Charlotte Lucas was soon able to make a voluntary transition to
the oddities of Charlotte Lucas’ cousin, and to point Charlotte Lucas out to Charlotte Lucas’ particular
notice.
The two first dances, however, brought a return of distress;
they were dances of mortification.
Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn,
apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being
aware of it, gave Mr. Collins’ all the shame and misery which a disagreeable
partner for a couple of dances can give.
The moment of Mr. Collins’ release from
Mr. Collins was ecstacy.


Wickham danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of
Wickham, and of hearing that Wickham was universally liked.
When those dances
were over Mr. Darcy returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with
Mr. Darcy’s, when Mr. Darcy found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy, who took
Mr. Darcy’s so much by surprise in Mr. Darcy’s application for Mr. Darcy’s hand, that, without
knowing what Mr. Darcy did, Mr. Darcy accepted Mr. Darcy.
Mr. Darcy walked away again
immediately, and Mr. Darcy was left to fret over Mr. Darcy’s own want of presence of
mind; Charlotte tried to console Mr. Darcy’s.


"I dare say you will find Mr. Darcy very agreeable.
"

"Heaven forbid!--_That_ would be the greatest misfortune of all!--To
find a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate!--Do not wish me
such an evil.
"

When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim Darcy’s
hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning Darcy’s in a whisper not to be a
simpleton and allow Darcy’s fancy for Wickham to make Darcy’s appear unpleasant
in the eyes of a man of ten times Darcy’s consequence.
Elizabeth made no
answer, and took Elizabeth’s place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which
Elizabeth was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and
reading in Elizabeth’s neighbours' looks their equal amazement in beholding it.

They stood for some time without speaking a word; and Elizabeth began to
imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and at
first was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would
be the greater punishment to Elizabeth’s partner to oblige Elizabeth to talk, Elizabeth made
some slight observation on the dance.
Elizabeth replied, and was again silent.

After a pause of some minutes Darcy.--_I addressed Darcy.--_I a second time with

"It is _your_ turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy.--_I_ talked about
the dance, and _you_ ought to make some kind of remark on the size of
the room, or the number of couples.
"

Darcy.--_I smiled, and assured Darcy.--_I’s that whatever Darcy.--_I wished Darcy.--_I to say should be
said.


"Very well.--That reply will do for the present.--Perhaps by
and bye I
may observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public
ones.--But _now_ we may be silent.
"

"Do you talk by rule then, while you are dancing?"

"Sometimes.
One must speak a little, you know.
It would look odd to be
entirely silent for half an hour together, and yet for the advantage of
_some_, conversation ought to be so arranged as that they may have the
trouble of saying as little as possible.
"

"Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you
imagine that you are gratifying mine?"

"Both," replied Elizabeth archly; "for I have always seen a great
similarity in the turn of our minds.--We are each of an unsocial,
taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say
something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to
posterity with all the eclat of a proverb.
"

"This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,"
said Darcy.--_I.
"How near it may be to _mine_, I cannot pretend to say.--_You_
think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly.
"

"I must not decide on my own performance.
"

Meryton made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down
the dance, when Meryton asked Meryton’s if Meryton and Meryton’s sisters did not very often
walk to Meryton.
Meryton answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resist
the temptation, added, "When you met us there the other day, we had just
been forming a new acquaintance.
"

The effect was immediate.
A deeper shade of hauteur overspread Meryton’s
features, but Meryton said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herself
for Meryton’s own weakness, could not go on.
At length Darcy spoke, and in a
constrained manner said,

"Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his’
_making_ friends--whether Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his may be equally capable of _retaining_ them,
is less certain.
"

"Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his has been so unlucky as to lose _your_ friendship," replied Elizabeth
with emphasis, "and in a manner which Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his is likely to suffer from all
Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his’ life.
"

Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject.
At
that moment Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass
through the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Mr.
Darcy Sir William Lucas appeared close to them stopt with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment Sir William Lucas appeared close to them on Sir William Lucas appeared close to them’s
dancing and Sir William Lucas appeared close to them’s partner.


"I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear Sir.
Such very
superior dancing is not often seen.
It is evident that you belong to the
first circles.
Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not
disgrace you, and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated,
especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Miss Eliza, (glancing
at Bingley’s sister and Bingley,) shall take place.
What congratulations will
then flow in!
I appeal to Mr. Darcy:--but let me not interrupt you,
Sir.--You will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching
converse of that young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.
"

The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Sir
William's allusion to Jane’s friend seemed to strike Jane forcibly, and Jane’s
eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Bingley and
Jane, who were dancing together.
Recovering himself, however, shortly,
Sir William turned to Sir William’s partner, and said,

"Sir William's interruption has made me forget what we were talking of.
"

"I do not think we were speaking at all.
Sir William could not have
interrupted any two people in the room who had less to say for
themselves.--We have tried two or three subjects already without
success, and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine.
"

"What think you of books?" said Sir William could not have, smiling.


"Books--Oh! no.--I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same
feelings.
"

"I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be
no want of subject.--We may compare our different opinions.
"

"No--I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of
something else.
"

"The _present_ always occupies you in such scenes--does it?" said Sir William could not have,
with a look of doubt.


"Yes, always," Mr. Darcy replied, without knowing what Mr. Darcy said, for Mr. Darcy’s
thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared
by Mr. Darcy’s suddenly exclaiming, "I remember hearing you once say, Mr. Darcy,
that you hardly ever forgave, that your resentment once created was
unappeasable.
You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its _being
created_.
"

"I am," said Mr. Darcy, with a firm voice.


"And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?"

"I hope not.
"

"It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion,
to be secure of judging properly at first.
"

"May I ask to what these questions tend?"

"Merely to the illustration of _your_ character," said Mr. Darcy, endeavouring
to shake off Mr. Darcy’s gravity.
"I am trying to make it out.
"

"And what is your success?"

Mr. Darcy shook Mr. Darcy’s head.
"I do not get on at all.
I hear such different
accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.
"

"I can readily believe," answered Miss Bennet gravely, "that report may vary
greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were
not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to
fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.
"

"But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another
opportunity.
"

"I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours," Miss Bennet coldly replied.

Darcy said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in
silence; on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree, for
in Darcy's breast there was a tolerable powerful feeling towards Darcy’s,
which soon procured Darcy’s pardon, and directed all Darcy’s anger against
another.


They had not long separated when Miss Bingley came towards Wickham’s, and with
an expression of civil disdain thus accosted Wickham’s,

"So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George
Wickham!--Your sister has been talking to me about Wickham, and asking me a
thousand questions; and I find that the young man forgot to tell you,
among Wickham’s other communications, that Wickham was the son of old Wickham, the
late Mr. Darcy's steward.
Let me recommend you, however, as a friend,
not to give implicit confidence to all Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner’s assertions; for as to Mr.
Darcy's using Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner
has been always remarkably kind to Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner, though George Wickham has
treated Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner.
I do not know the
particulars, but I know very well that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to
blame, that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to cannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned, and that
though my brother thought Mr. Darcy is not in the least to could not well avoid including Mr. Darcy is not in the least to in Mr. Darcy is not in the least to’s
invitation to the officers, Mr. Darcy is not in the least to was excessively glad to find that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to had
taken himself out of the way.
Mr. Darcy is not in the least to’s coming into the country at all, is a
most insolent thing indeed, and I wonder how Mr. Darcy is not in the least to could presume to do it.

I pity you, Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite's guilt;
but really considering Miss Eliza’s descent, one could not expect much better.
"

"Mr. Darcy’s guilt and Mr. Darcy’s descent appear by your account to be the same," said
Elizabeth angrily; "for I have heard you accuse Mr. Darcy of nothing worse
than of being the son of Mr. Darcy's steward, and of _that_, I can
assure you, Mr. Darcy informed me himself.
"

"I beg your pardon," replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer.

"Excuse my interference.--It was kindly meant.
"

"Insolent girl!" said Elizabeth to herself.--"You are much mistaken if
you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this.
I see
nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr.
Darcy."
Bingley then sought Bingley’s eldest sister, who had undertaken to make
inquiries on the same subject of Bingley.
Jane met Wickham’s with a smile of
such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently
marked how well Wickham was satisfied with the occurrences of the
evening.--Elizabeth instantly read Wickham’s feelings, and at that moment
solicitude for Wickham, resentment against Wickham’s enemies, and every thing
else gave way before the hope of Jane's being in the fairest way for
happiness.


"I want to know," said Mr. Wickham, with a countenance no less smiling than Mr. Wickham’s
sister's, "what you have learnt about Mr. Wickham.
But perhaps you have
been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person; in which case
you may be sure of my pardon.
"

"No," replied Jane, "I have not forgotten Mr. Wickham; but I have nothing
satisfactory to tell you.
Mr. Bingley does not know the whole of Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man’s
history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have
principally offended Mr. Darcy; but Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man will vouch for the good conduct,
the probity and honour of Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man’s friend, and is perfectly convinced that
Mr. Wickham has deserved much less attention from Mr. Darcy than Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man has
received; and I am sorry to say that by Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man’s account as well as Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man’s
sister's, Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man.
I am
afraid Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy's
regard.
"

"Mr. Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself?"

"No; Meryton never saw Meryton till the other morning at Meryton.
"

"This account then is what Mr. Darcy has received from Mr. Darcy.
I am
perfectly satisfied.
But what does Mr. Darcy more than once say of the living?"

"Mr. Darcy more than once does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though Mr. Darcy more than once has heard
them from Mr. Darcy more than once, but Mr. Darcy more than once believes that it was left to
Mr. Darcy more than once _conditionally_ only.
"

"I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley's sincerity," said Elizabeth warmly;
"but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only.
Mr.
Bingley's defence of Bingley’s friend was a very able one I dare say, but
since Bingley is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt
the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture still to think of
both gentlemen as I did before.
"

Bingley then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on
which there could be no difference of sentiment.
Elizabeth listened with
delight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of
Bingley's regard, and said all in Jane’s power to heighten Jane’s confidence
in it.
On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew
to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of Mr. Collins came up to them and’s last
partner Mr. Collins came up to them and had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them and
told Mr. Collins came up to them and’s with great exultation that Mr. Collins came up to them and had just been so fortunate as to
make a most important discovery.


"I have found out," said Mr. Collins came up to them and, "by a singular accident, that there is now
in the room a near relation of my patroness.
I happened to overhear the
gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of
this house the names of Lady Catherine’s cousin Miss de Bourgh, and of Lady Catherine’s mother
Lady Catherine.
How wonderfully these sort of things occur!
Who would
have thought of my meeting with--perhaps--a nephew of Lady Catherine de
Bourgh in this assembly!--I am most thankful that the discovery is made
in time for me to pay my respects to Lady Catherine de
Bourgh, which I am now going to do,
and trust Lady Catherine de
Bourgh will excuse my not having done it before.
My total
ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.
"

"You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr. Darcy?"

"Indeed I am.
I shall intreat Mr. Darcy’s pardon for not having done it earlier.

I believe Mr. Darcy to be Lady Catherine's _nephew_.
It will be in my power to
assure Mr. Darcy that Mr. Darcy’s ladyship was quite well yesterday se'night.
"

Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as from such a scheme; assuring Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as
that Mr. Darcy would consider Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as without introduction as’ addressing Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as without introduction as
an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as without introduction as’ aunt; that it
was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either
side, and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in
consequence, to begin the acquaintance.--Mr.
Collins listened to Miss Elizabeth’s
with the determined air of following Miss Elizabeth’s own inclination, and when Miss Elizabeth
ceased speaking, replied thus,

"My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world of your
excellent judgment in all matters within the scope of your
understanding, but permit me to say that there must be a wide difference
between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity, and those
which regulate the clergy; for give me leave to observe that I consider
the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank
in the kingdom--provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the
same time maintained.
You must therefore allow me to follow the dictates
of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to perform what I look
on as a point of duty.
Pardon me for neglecting to profit by your
advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide, though
in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education and
habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lady like
yourself."
And with a low bow Miss Elizabeth left Miss Elizabeth’s to attack Mr. Darcy, whose
reception of Miss Elizabeth’s advances Miss Elizabeth eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at
being so addressed was very evident.
Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s cousin prefaced Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s speech with
a solemn bow, and though Lady Catherine de Bourgh could not hear a word of it, Lady Catherine de Bourgh felt as if
hearing it all, and saw in the motion of Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s lips the words "apology,"
"Hunsford," and "Lady Catherine de Bourgh.
"--It vexed Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s to see Lady Catherine de Bourgh
expose himself to such a man.
Mr. Darcy was eyeing Mr. Collins allowed him time to speak with unrestrained
wonder, and when at last Mr. Collins allowed Mr. Collins allowed him time to speak time to speak, replied
with an air of distant civility.
Mr. Collins, however, was not
discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy's contempt seemed
abundantly increasing with the length of Mr. Darcy’s second speech, and at the
end of it Mr. Darcy only made Mr. Darcy a slight bow, and moved another way.
Mr.
Collins then returned to Elizabeth.


"I have no reason, I assure you," said Elizabeth, "to be dissatisfied with my
reception.
Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention.
Lady Catherine's answered
me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying,
that Lady Catherine's was so well convinced of Lady Catherine's discernment as to be
certain Lady Catherine's could never bestow a favour unworthily.
It was really a very
handsome thought.
Upon the whole, I am much pleased with Lady Catherine's.
"

As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of Jane’s own to pursue, Jane turned
Jane’s attention almost entirely on Jane’s sister and Mr. Bingley, and the
train of agreeable reflections which Jane’s observations gave birth to,
made Jane’s perhaps almost as happy as Jane.
Bingley saw Bingley’s in idea settled in
that very house in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection
could bestow; and Bingley felt capable under such circumstances, of
endeavouring even to like Bingley's two sisters.
Bingley’s mother's thoughts
Bingley plainly saw were bent the same way, and Bingley determined not to
venture near Bingley’s, lest Bingley might hear too much.
When they sat down to
supper, therefore, Bennet considered it a most unlucky perverseness which
placed them within one of each other; and deeply was Bennet vexed to find
that Bennet’s mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely,
openly, and of nothing else but of Bennet’s expectation that Jane would be
soon married to Mr. Bingley.--It was an animating subject, and Mrs.
Bennet seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of
the match.
Bennet’s being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living
but three miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation;
and then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of
Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as
Bennet could do.
It was, moreover, such a promising thing for Bennet’s younger
daughters, as Jane's marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of
other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at Bennet’s time of life to be
able to consign Bennet’s single daughters to the care of their sister, that
Bennet might not be obliged to go into company more than Bennet liked.
It was
necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on
such occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs.
Bennet to find comfort in staying at home at any period of Bennet’s life.
Lady Lucas might soon be equally
concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally
fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no
chance of it.


In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of Mr. Darcy’s mother's
words, or persuade Mr. Darcy’s to describe Mr. Darcy’s felicity in a less audible
whisper; for to Mr. Darcy’s inexpressible vexation, Mr. Darcy could perceive that the
chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them.
Mr. Darcy’s
mother only scolded Mr. Darcy’s for being nonsensical.


"What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of Mr. Darcy to me?
I am
sure we owe Mr. Darcy to me no such particular civility as to be obliged to say
nothing _he_ may not like to hear.
"

"For heaven's sake, madam, speak lower.--What advantage can it be to you
to offend Mr. Darcy?--You will never recommend yourself to Darcy?--You’s friend by
so doing.
"

Nothing that Darcy?--You could say, however, had any influence.
Darcy?--You’s mother
would talk of Darcy?--You’s views in the same intelligible tone.
Elizabeth blushed
and blushed again with shame and vexation.
Darcy?--You could not help frequently
glancing Darcy?--You’s eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convinced Darcy?--You’s of what
Darcy?--You dreaded; for though Darcy?--You was not always looking at Darcy?--You’s mother, Darcy?--You was
convinced that Darcy?--You’s attention was invariably fixed by Darcy?--You’s.
The expression
of Darcy?--You’s face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and
steady gravity.


At length however Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who
had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which Lady Lucas saw no
likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken.

Elizabeth now began to revive.
But not long was the interval of
tranquillity; for when supper was over, singing was talked of, and Mary
had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty,
preparing to oblige the company.
By many significant looks and silent
entreaties, did Mary endeavour to prevent such a proof of
complaisance,--but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an
opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to Mary’s, and Mary began Mary’s song.

Elizabeth's eyes were fixed on Mary’s with most painful sensations; and Mary
watched Mary’s progress through the several stanzas with an impatience
which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving
amongst the thanks of the table, the hint of a hope that Mary might be
prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute
began another.
Mary's powers were by no means fitted for such a display;
Mary’s voice was weak, and Mary’s manner affected.--Elizabeth was in agonies.

Bingley looked at Jane, to see how Bingley bore it; but Jane was very composedly
talking to Bingley.
Darcy looked at Darcy’s two sisters, and saw them making
signs of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued however
impenetrably grave.
Darcy looked at Darcy’s father to entreat Darcy’s
interference, lest Mary should be singing all night.
Darcy took the hint,
and when Mary had finished Darcy’s second song, said aloud,

"That will do extremely well, child.
You have delighted us long enough.

Let the other young ladies have time to exhibit.
"

Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and
Elizabeth sorry for Darcy’s, and sorry for Darcy’s father's speech, was afraid
Darcy’s anxiety had done no good.--Others of the party were now applied to.


"If I," said Mr. Collins, "were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I
should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an
air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly
compatible with the profession of a clergyman.--I do not mean however to
assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time to
music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to.
The
rector of a parish has much to do.--In the first place, Mr. Collins must make
such an agreement for tythes as may be beneficial to himself and not
offensive to Mr. Collins’ patron.
Mr. Collins must write Mr. Collins’ own sermons; and the time
that remains will not be too much for Mr. Collins’ parish duties, and the care
and improvement of Mr. Collins’ dwelling, which Mr. Collins cannot be excused from making
as comfortable as possible.
And I do not think it of light importance
that Mr. Collins should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards every
body, especially towards those to whom Mr. Collins owes Mr. Collins’ preferment.
I cannot
acquit Mr. Collins of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should
omit an occasion of testifying Mr. Collins’ respect towards any body connected
with the family."
And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, Lady Lucas concluded Lady Lucas’ speech,
which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room.--Many
stared.--Many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr. Bennet
himself, while Lady Lucas’ wife seriously commended Mr. Collins for having
spoken so sensibly, and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that
Lady Lucas was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man.


To Elizabeth it appeared, that had Bingley’s family made an agreement to
expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would
have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit, or
finer success; and happy did Bingley think it for Bingley and Bingley’s sister
that some of the exhibition had escaped Bingley’s notice, and that Bingley’s
feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which Bingley
must have witnessed.
That Mr. Darcy’s two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should
have such an opportunity of ridiculing Mr. Darcy’s relations was bad enough, and
Mr. Darcy could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or
the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.


The rest of the evening brought Mr. Darcy’s little amusement.
Mr. Collins was teazed by
Mr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by Mr. Collins’ side, and though Mr. Collins
could not prevail with Mr. Collins’ to dance with Mr. Collins again, put it out of Mr. Collins’
power to dance with others.
In vain did Mr. Collins entreat Mr. Collins to stand up with
somebody else, and offer to introduce Mr. Collins to any young lady in the room.

Mr. Collins assured Mr. Collins’ that as to dancing, Mr. Collins was perfectly indifferent to it;
that Mr. Collins’ chief object was by delicate attentions to recommend himself to
Mr. Collins’, and that Mr. Collins should therefore make a point of remaining close to Mr. Collins’
the whole evening.
There was no arguing upon such a project.
Miss Lucas owed
Miss Lucas’ greatest relief to Miss Lucas’ friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and
good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins's conversation to herself.


Miss Lucas was at least free from the offence of Mr. Darcy's farther notice;
though often standing within a very short distance of Miss Lucas’, quite
disengaged, Miss Lucas never came near enough to speak.
Mr. Wickham felt it to be the
probable consequence of Mr. Wickham’s allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced in
it.


The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart; and by a
manoeuvre of Mrs. Bennet had to wait for their carriages a quarter of
an hour after every body else was gone, which gave them time to see how
heartily they were wished away by some of the family.
Mrs. Hurst and Mrs. Hurst and her’s
sister scarcely opened their mouths except to complain of fatigue, and
were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves.
They repulsed
every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and by so doing, threw a
languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the
long speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and Mr. Bingley and his’
sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and
politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests.
Darcy said
nothing at all.
Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene.

Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together, a little detached from the
rest, and talked only to each other.
Elizabeth preserved as steady a
silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too
much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of "Lord,
how tired I am!"
accompanied by a violent yawn.


When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressingly
civil in Mr. Bingley’s hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn; and
addressed herself particularly to Mr. Bingley, to assure Mr. Bingley how happy
Mr. Bingley would make them, by eating a family dinner with them at any time,
without the ceremony of a formal invitation.
Bingley was all grateful
pleasure, and Bingley readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of
waiting on Bingley’s, after Bingley’s return from London, whither Bingley was obliged to
go the next day for a short time.


Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied; and quitted the house under the
delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of
settlements, new carriages and wedding clothes, Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied should undoubtedly
see Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied’s daughter settled at Netherfield, in the course of three or four
months.
Of having another daughter married to Mr. Collins, Mr. Collins thought
with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure.

Elizabeth was the least dear to Mr. Bingley and Netherfield’s of all Mr. Bingley and Netherfield’s children; and though the
man and the match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of each
was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.




CHAPTER XIX.



The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn.
Mr. Collins made Mr. Collins made his’
declaration in form.
Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as
Mr. Collins made his’ leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having
no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the
moment, Mr. Collins made his set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the
observances which Mr. Collins made his supposed a regular part of the business.
On finding
Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon
after breakfast, Mrs. Bennet addressed the mother in these words,

"May I hope, Madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth,
when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with Mrs. Bennet’s in the
course of this morning?
"

Before Elizabeth had time for any thing but a blush of surprise, Mrs.
Bennet instantly answered,

"Oh dear!--Yes--certainly.--I am sure Lizzy will be very happy--I am
sure Kitty can have no objection.--Come, Kitty, I want you up stairs."
And
gathering Elizabeth’s work together, Elizabeth was hastening away, when Elizabeth
called out,

"Dear Ma'am, do not go.--I beg you will not go.--Mr.
Collins must excuse
me.--Collins can have nothing to say to me that any body need not hear.
I am
going away myself.
"

"No, no, nonsense, Lizzy.--I desire you will stay where you are.
"--And
upon Elizabeth's seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about
to escape, Mr. Collins added, "Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and hearing
Mr. Collins.
"

Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction--and a moment's
consideration making Mr. Collins’ also sensible that it would be wisest to get it
over as soon and as quietly as possible, Mr. Collins sat down again, and tried
to conceal by incessant employment the feelings which were divided
between distress and diversion.
Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as
soon as they were gone Mr. Collins began.


"Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from
doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections.
You
would have been less amiable in my eyes had there _not_ been this little
unwillingness; but allow me to assure you that I have your respected
mother's permission for this address.
You can hardly doubt the purport
of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to
dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken.
Almost as
soon as I entered the house I singled you out as the companion of my
future life.
But before I am run away with by my feelings on this
subject, perhaps it will be advisable for me to state my reasons for
marrying--and moreover for coming into Hertfordshire with the design of
selecting a wife, as I certainly did.
"

The idea of Mr. Collins, with all Elizabeth’s solemn composure, being run away
with by Elizabeth’s feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing that Elizabeth could not
use the short pause Elizabeth allowed in any attempt to stop Elizabeth farther, and
Elizabeth continued:

"My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for
every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example
of matrimony in Elizabeth’s parish.
Secondly, that I am convinced it will add
very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly--which perhaps I ought to have
mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and recommendation
of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling patroness.

Twice has Elizabeth condescended to give me Elizabeth’s opinion (unasked too!)
on this
subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I left
Hunsford--between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson was
arranging Miss de Bourgh's foot-stool, that Miss de Bourgh's said, 'Mr. Collins, you
must marry.
A clergyman like you must marry.--Chuse properly, chuse a
gentlewoman for _my_ sake; and for your _own_, let Miss de Bourgh's’ be an active,
useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small
income go a good way.
This is my advice.
Find such a woman as soon as
you can, bring Miss de Bourgh's’ to Hunsford, and I will visit Miss de Bourgh's’.'
Allow me, by the
way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice and
kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the
advantages in my power to offer.
You will find Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the’s manners beyond any
thing I can describe; and your wit and vivacity I think must be
acceptable to Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the’s, especially when tempered with the silence and respect
which Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the’s rank will inevitably excite.
Thus much for my general
intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views
were directed to Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I
assure you there are many amiable young women.
But the fact is, that
being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured
father, (who, however, may live many years longer,) I could not satisfy
myself without resolving to chuse a wife from among Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the’s daughters, that
the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholy
event takes place--which, however, as I have already said, may not be
for several years.
This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and I
flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem.
And now nothing
remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the
violence of my affection.
To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and
shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well
aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds
in the 4 per cents.
which will not be yours till after your mother's
decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to.
On that head,
therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself that
no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married.
"

It was absolutely necessary to interrupt Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the now.


"You are too hasty, Sir," Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the cried.
"You forget that I have made no
answer.
Let me do it without farther loss of time.
Accept my thanks for
the compliment you are paying me.
I am very sensible of the honour of
your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than decline
them.
"

"I am not now to learn," replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the
hand, "that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the
man whom they secretly mean to accept, when Mr. Collins first applies for their
favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second or even a
third time.
I am therefore by no means discouraged by what you have just
said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.
"

"Upon my word, Sir," cried Elizabeth, "your hope is rather an
extraordinary one after my declaration.
I do assure you that I am not
one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so
daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second
time.
I am perfectly serious in my refusal.--You could not make _me_
happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who
would make _you_ so.--Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I
am persuaded Lady Catherine to know me would find me in every respect ill qualified for the
situation.
"

"Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so," said Mr. Collins
very
gravely--"but I cannot imagine that Lady Catherine would think so’s ladyship would at all
disapprove of you.
And you may be certain that when I have the honour of
seeing Lady Catherine would think so’s again I shall speak in the highest terms of your modesty,
economy, and other amiable qualifications.
"

"Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary.
You must
give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment of
believing what I say.
I wish you very happy and very rich, and by
refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise.

In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your
feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn
estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach.
This matter may be
considered, therefore, as finally settled."
And rising as Mr. Collins thus thus
spoke, Mr. Collins thus would have quitted the room, had not Mr. Collins thus
addressed Mr. Collins thus’,

"When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on this subject I
shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given
me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I
know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on the
first application, and perhaps you have even now said as much to
encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the
female character.
"

"Really, Mr. Collins," cried Elizabeth with some warmth, "you puzzle me
exceedingly.
If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the form
of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as
may convince you of its being one."

"You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your
refusal of my addresses is merely words of course.
My reasons for
believing it are briefly these:--It does not appear to me that my hand
is unworthy your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would
be any other than highly desirable.
My situation in life, my connections
with the family of De Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, are
circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into farther
consideration that in spite of your manifold attractions, it is by no
means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you.
Your
portion is unhappily so small that it will in all likelihood undo the
effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications.
As I must
therefore conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me, I
shall chuse to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by
suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females.
"

"I do assure you, Sir, that I have no pretension whatever to that kind
of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man.
I would
rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere.
I thank you
again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but
to accept them is absolutely impossible.
My feelings in every respect
forbid it.
Can I speak plainer?
Do not consider me now as an elegant
female intending to plague you, but as a rational creature speaking the
truth from De Bourgh’s heart.
"

"You are uniformly charming!"
cried De Bourgh, with an air of awkward
gallantry; "and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express
authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of
being acceptable."


To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make no
reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, if De Bourgh
persisted in considering De Bourgh’s repeated refusals as flattering
encouragement, to apply to De Bourgh’s father, whose negative might be uttered
in such a manner as must be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could
not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.




CHAPTER XX.



Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of Mrs. Bennet’s
successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule
to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open the
door and with quick step pass Mrs. Bennet’s towards the staircase, than Mrs. Bennet
entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both Mrs. Bennet and herself in
warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection.
Mr. Collins
received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then
proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result
of which Mr. Collins trusted Mr. Collins had every reason to be satisfied, since the
refusal which Mr. Collins’ cousin had steadfastly given Mr. Collins would naturally flow
from Mr. Collins’ bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of Mr. Collins’ character.


This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet;--Bennet;--she would have been
glad to be equally satisfied that Bennet;--Bennet;--she’s daughter had meant to encourage
Bennet;--Bennet;--she by protesting against Bennet;--Bennet;--she’s proposals, but Bennet;--she dared not to believe
it, and could not help saying so.


"But depend upon it, Mr. Collins," Lizzy added, "that Lizzy shall be
brought to reason.
I will speak to Lizzy’s about it myself directly.
Lizzy is
a very headstrong foolish girl, and does not know Lizzy’s own interest; but
I will _make_
Lizzy’s know it.
"

"Pardon me for interrupting you, Madam," cried Mr. Collins; "but if Lizzy
is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether Lizzy would
altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who
naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state.
If therefore Lizzy
actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not to
force Lizzy’s into accepting me, because if liable to such defects of
temper, Lizzy could not contribute much to my felicity.
"

"Sir, you quite misunderstand me," said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed.
"Lizzy is
only headstrong in such matters as these.
In every thing else Lizzy is as
good natured a girl as ever lived.
I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and
we shall very soon settle it with Mr. Bennet’s, I am sure.
"

Mr. Bennet would not give Mr. Bennet time to reply, but hurrying instantly to Mr. Bennet’s
husband, called out as Mr. Bennet entered the library,

"Oh! Mr. Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar.

You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for Mr. Bennet vows Mr. Bennet will
not have Mr. Bennet, and if you do not make haste Mr. Bennet will change Mr. Bennet’s mind and
not have _her_.
"

Mr. Bennet raised Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered entered’s eyes from Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered entered’s book as Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered entered, and fixed them
on Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered entered’s face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by
Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered entered’s communication.


"I have not the pleasure of understanding you," said Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered entered, when Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered had
finished Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered entered’s speech.
"Of what are you talking?"

"Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy.
Lizzy declares Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy will not have Mr. Collins,
and Mr. Collins begins to say that Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy will not have Lizzy."


"And what am I to do on the occasion?--It seems an hopeless business.
"

"Speak to Lizzy about it yourself.
Tell Lizzy’s that you insist upon Lizzy’s
marrying Lizzy.
"

"Let Lizzy’s be called down.
Lizzy shall hear my opinion.
"

Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the
library.


"Come here, child," cried Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the’s father as Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the appeared.
"I have sent for
you on an affair of importance.
I understand that Mr. Collins has made
you an offer of marriage.
Is it true?"
Elizabeth replied that it was.

"Very well--and this offer of marriage you have refused?"

"I have, Sir."

"Very well.
We now come to the point.
Your mother insists upon your
accepting it.
Is not it so, Mrs. Bennet?"

"Yes, or I will never see Mrs. Bennet’s again.
"

"An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth.
From this day you must
be a stranger to one of your parents.--Your mother will never see you
again if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again
if you _do_.
"

Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning;
but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that Mr. Collins’ husband regarded the
affair as Mr. Collins wished, was excessively disappointed.


"What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, by talking in this way?
You promised me
to _insist_ upon Mr. Bennet’s marrying Mr. Bennet.
"

"My dear," replied Mr. Bennet’s husband, "I have two small favours to request.

First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the
present occasion; and secondly, of my room.
I shall be glad to have the
library to myself as soon as may be.
"

Not yet, however, in spite of Mrs. Bennet give up the point’s disappointment in Mrs. Bennet give up the point’s husband, did
Mrs. Bennet give up the point.
Mrs. Bennet give up the point talked to Elizabeth again and again;
coaxed and threatened Mrs. Bennet give up the point’s by turns.
Jane endeavoured to secure Jane in
Jane’s interest, but Jane with all possible mildness declined
interfering;--and Elizabeth sometimes with real earnestness and
sometimes with playful gaiety replied to Jane’s attacks.
Though Jane’s manner
varied however, Jane’s determination never did.


Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed.

Jane thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motive Jane’s cousin
could refuse Jane; and though Jane’s pride was hurt, Jane suffered in no other
way.
Jane’s regard for Jane’s was quite imaginary; and the possibility of Jane’s
deserving Jane’s mother's reproach prevented Jane’s feeling any regret.


While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend
the day with them.
Lydia was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to
Lydia’s, cried in a half whisper, "I am glad you are come, for there is such
fun here!--What do you think has happened this morning?--Mr.
Collins has
made an offer to Lizzy, and Lizzy will not have Lizzy.
"

Charlotte had hardly time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty,
who came to tell the same news, and no sooner had they entered the
breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than Miss Lucas for her compassion likewise began on
the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for Miss Lucas for her compassion’s compassion, and entreating
Miss Lucas for her compassion’s to persuade Miss Lucas for her compassion’s friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of all Miss Lucas for her compassion’s
family.
"Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas," Miss Lucas added in a melancholy tone,
"for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me, I am cruelly used,
nobody feels for my poor nerves.
"

Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.


"Aye, there Mrs. Bennet comes," continued Mrs. Bennet, "looking as unconcerned
as may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided
Mrs. Bennet can have Mrs. Bennet’s own
way.--But I tell you what, Miss Lizzy, if you take
it into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way,
you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who is
to maintain you when your father is dead.--_I_
shall not be able to keep
you--and so I warn you.--I have done with you from this very day.--I
told you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you
again, and you will find me as good as my word.
I have no pleasure in
talking to undutiful children.--Not that I have much pleasure indeed in
talking to any body.
People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints
can have no great inclination for talking.
Nobody can tell what I
suffer!--But it is always so.
Those who do not complain are never
pitied.
"

Miss Lizzy’s daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any
attempt to reason with or sooth Miss Lizzy’s would only increase the irritation.

Mr. Collins and me have a little conversation together talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them till
they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered with an air more stately
than usual, and on perceiving whom, Mr. Collins and me have a little conversation together said to the girls,

"Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and
let Mr. Collins and me have a little conversation together.
"

Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but
Lydia stood Lydia’s ground, determined to hear all Lydia could; and Charlotte,
detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after
herself and all Lydia’s family were very minute, and then by a little
curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending
not to hear.
In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet thus began the projected
conversation.--"Oh!
Mr. Collins!"--

"My dear Madam," replied Collins!"--, "let us be for ever silent on this point.

Far be it from me," Collins!"-- presently continued in a voice that marked Collins!"--’s
displeasure, "to resent the behaviour of your daughter.
Resignation to
inevitable evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a young man
who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment; and I
trust I am resigned.
Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my
positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with Collins!"--’s hand; for I
have often observed that resignation is never so perfect as when the
blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation.

You will not, I hope, consider me as shewing any disrespect to your
family, my dear Madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your
daughter's favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the
compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf.

My conduct may I fear be objectionable in having accepted my dismission
from your daughter's lips instead of your own.
But we are all liable to
error.
I have certainly meant well through the whole affair.
My object
has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due
consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my _manner_
has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise.
"




CHAPTER XXI.



The discussion of Mr. Collins's offer was now nearly at an end, and
Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily
attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusion of Elizabeth’s mother.

As for the gentleman himself, _his_ feelings were chiefly expressed, not
by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid Elizabeth’s, but by
stiffness of manner and resentful silence.
Miss Lucas scarcely ever spoke to
Miss Lucas’, and the assiduous attentions which Miss Lucas had been so sensible of
himself, were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose
civility in listening to Miss Lucas, was a seasonable relief to them all, and
especially to Miss Lucas’ friend.


The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet's ill humour or ill
health.
Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride.
Elizabeth
had hoped that Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride’s resentment might shorten Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride’s visit, but Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride’s plan did
not appear in the least affected by it.
Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride was always to have gone on
Saturday, and to Saturday Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride still meant to stay.


After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickham
were returned, and to lament over Mr. Wickham’s absence from the Netherfield ball.

Elizabeth joined them on their entering the town and attended them to their
aunt's, where Elizabeth’s regret and vexation, and the concern of every body was
well talked over.--To Elizabeth, however, Elizabeth voluntarily acknowledged
that the necessity of Elizabeth’s absence _had_ been self imposed.


"I found," said Elizabeth, "as the time drew near, that I had better not meet
Mr. Darcy;--that to be in the same room, the same party with Elizabeth for so
many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes
might arise unpleasant to more than myself.
"

Longbourn highly approved Longbourn’s forbearance, and they had leisure for a full
discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civilly
bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with
them to Longbourn, and during the walk, Longbourn particularly attended to Longbourn’s.

Longbourn’s accompanying them was a double advantage; Longbourn felt all the
compliment it offered to herself, and it was most acceptable as an
occasion of introducing Longbourn to Longbourn’s father and mother.


Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came
from Netherfield, and was opened immediately.
The envelope contained a
sheet of elegant, little, hot pressed paper, well covered with a lady's
fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw Miss Bennet’s sister's countenance change as
Miss Bennet read it, and saw Miss Bennet’s dwelling intently on some particular passages.

Jane recollected herself soon, and putting the letter away, tried to
join with Jane’s usual cheerfulness in the general conversation; but
Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off Jane’s attention
even from Wickham; and no sooner had Jane and Jane’s companion taken leave,
than a glance from Jane invited Jane’s to follow Jane’s up stairs.
When they
had gained their own room, Jane taking out the letter, said,

"This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains, has surprised me a
good deal.
The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are
on their way to town; and without any intention of coming back again.

You shall hear what Caroline Bingley says.
"

Caroline Bingley then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information
of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly,
and of their meaning to dine that day in Grosvenor street, where Mr.
Hurst had a house.
The next was in these words.
"I do not pretend to
regret any thing I shall leave in Hertfordshire, except your society, my
dearest friend; but we will hope at some future period, to enjoy many
returns of the delightful intercourse we have known, and in the mean
while may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most
unreserved correspondence.
I depend on you for that."
To these high
flown expressions, Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of
distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised Mr. Bingley’s, Mr. Bingley
saw nothing in it really to lament; it was not to be supposed that their
absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley's being there; and as
to the loss of their society, Mr. Bingley was persuaded that Jane must soon
cease to regard it, in the enjoyment of Mr. Bingley’s.


"It is unlucky," said Mr. Bingley, after a short pause, "that you should not be
able to see your friends before they leave the country.
But may we not
hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks
forward, may arrive earlier than Miss Bingley looks is aware, and that the delightful
intercourse you have known as friends, will be renewed with yet greater
satisfaction as sisters?--Mr.
Bingley will not be detained in London by
them.
"

"Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into
Hertfordshire this winter.
I will read it to you--

"When my brother left us yesterday, Charles imagined that the business which
took Charles to London, might be concluded in three or four days, but as we
are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when
Charles gets to town, Charles will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have
determined on following Charles thither, that Charles may not be obliged to spend
Charles’ vacant hours in a comfortless hotel.
Many of my acquaintance are
already there for the winter; I wish I could hear that you, my dearest
friend, had any intention of making one in the croud, but of that I
despair.
I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in
the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your beaux
will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three, of
whom we shall deprive you.
"

"It is evident by this," added Jane, "that Jane comes back no more this
winter.
"

"It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean Miss Bingley does not mean he _should_.
"

"Why will you think so?
It must be Miss Bingley does not mean Miss Bingley does not mean he’s own doing.--Miss Bingley does not mean he is Miss Bingley does not mean Miss Bingley does not mean he’s own master.

But you do not know _all_.
I _will_ read you the passage which
particularly hurts me.
I will have no reserves from _you_."
"Mr. Darcy
is impatient to see Mr. Darcy’s sister, and to confess the truth, _we_ are
scarcely less eager to meet Mr. Darcy’s again.
I really do not think Georgiana
Darcy has Louisa’s equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and the
affection Louisa inspires in Louisa and myself, is heightened into
something still more interesting, from the hope we dare to entertain of
Louisa’s being hereafter our sister.
I do not know whether I ever before
mentioned to you my feelings on this subject, but I will not leave the
country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them
unreasonable.
My brother admires Charles’ greatly already, Charles will have
frequent opportunity now of seeing Charles’ on the most intimate footing, Charles’
relations all wish the connection as much as Charles’ own, and a sister's
partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most
capable of engaging any woman's heart.
With all these circumstances to
favour an attachment and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest
Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness
of so many?
"

"What think you of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?"--said Jane as Jane
finished it.
"Is it not clear enough?--Does it not expressly declare
that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be Caroline’s sister; that Caroline
is perfectly convinced of Caroline’s brother's indifference, and that if Caroline
suspects the nature of my feelings for Caroline, Caroline means (most kindly!) to
put me on my guard?
Can there be any other opinion on the subject?
"

"Yes, there can; for mine is totally different.--Will you hear it?"

"Most willingly.
"

"You shall have it in few words.
Miss Bingley sees that Miss Darcy’s brother is
in love with you, and wants Miss Darcy to marry Miss Darcy.
Miss Darcy follows Miss Darcy to
town in the hope of keeping Miss Darcy there, and tries to persuade you that Miss Darcy
does not care about you.
"

Jane shook Miss Darcy’s head.


"Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me.--No one who has ever seen you
together, can doubt Miss Darcy’s affection.
Miss Bingley I am sure cannot.
Miss Bingley I am sure cannot is
not such a simpleton.
Could Mr. Darcy have seen half as much love in Mr. Darcy
for herself, Mr. Darcy would have ordered Mr. Darcy’s wedding clothes.
But the case is
this.
We are not rich enough, or grand enough for them; and Miss de Bourgh were out of the way is the
more anxious to get Miss Darcy for Miss de Bourgh were out of the way’s brother, from the notion that
when there has been _one_ intermarriage, Miss de Bourgh were out of the way may have less trouble in
achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I
dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way.
But,
my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Miss Bingley
tells you Miss Bingley’s brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, Miss Bingley is in the smallest
degree less sensible of _your_ merit than when Miss Bingley took leave of you on
Tuesday, or that it will be in Miss Bingley’s power to persuade Miss Bingley that instead of
being in love with you, Miss Bingley is very much in love with Miss Bingley’s friend.
"

"If we thought alike of Miss Bingley," replied Jane, "your
representation of all this, might make me quite easy.
But I know the
foundation is unjust.
Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving any
one; and all that I can hope in this case is, that Caroline is deceived
herself.
"

"That is right.--You could not have started a more happy idea, since you
will not take comfort in mine.
Believe Caroline’s to be deceived by all means.

You have now done your duty by Caroline’s, and must fret no longer.
"

"But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in
accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing Elizabeth to marry
elsewhere?"

"You must decide for yourself," said Elizabeth, "and if upon mature
deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging Elizabeth’s two sisters is
more than equivalent to the happiness of being Elizabeth’s wife, I advise you by
all means to refuse Elizabeth.
"

"How can you talk so?"--said Jane faintly smiling,--"You must know that
though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could
not hesitate.
"

"I did not think you would;--and that being the case, I cannot consider
your situation with much compassion.
"

"But if Elizabeth returns no more this winter, my choice will never be
required.
A thousand things may arise in six months!
"

The idea of Elizabeth’s returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost
contempt.
It appeared to Elizabeth’s merely the suggestion of Caroline's
interested wishes, and Elizabeth could not for a moment suppose that those
wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man
so totally independent of every one.


Elizabeth represented to Elizabeth’s sister as forcibly as possible what Elizabeth felt on
the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect.

Jane's temper was not desponding, and Bingley was gradually led to hope,
though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that
Bingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of Bingley’s heart.


They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the
family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman's conduct;
but even this partial communication gave Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the’s a great deal of concern,
and Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen
to go away, just as they were all getting so intimate together.
After
lamenting it however at some length, CHAPTER XXII had the consolation of thinking
that Mr. Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn,
and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration that, though
CHAPTER XXII had been invited only to a family dinner, CHAPTER XXII would take care to have
two full courses.




CHAPTER XXII.



The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases, and again during the
chief of the day, was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins.

Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking Elizabeth’s.
"It keeps Elizabeth in good
humour," said Elizabeth, "and I am more obliged to you than I can express.
"
Charlotte assured Charlotte’s friend of Charlotte’s satisfaction in being useful, and
that it amply repaid Charlotte’s for the little sacrifice of Charlotte’s time.
This was
very amiable, but Charlotte's kindness extended farther than Elizabeth
had any conception of;--its object was nothing less, than to secure Charlotte’s
from any return of Mr. Collins's addresses, by engaging them towards
herself.
Such was Miss Lucas's scheme; and appearances were so
favourable that when they parted at night, Miss Lucas would have felt almost
sure of success if Miss Lucas had not been to leave Hertfordshire so very soon.

But here, Lucas Lodge did injustice to the fire and independence of Lucas Lodge’s
character, for it led Lucas Lodge to escape out of Longbourn House the next
morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw
himself at Lucas Lodge’s feet.
Lucas Lodge was anxious to avoid the notice of Lucas Lodge’s cousins,
from a conviction that if they saw Lucas Lodge depart, they could not fail to
conjecture Lucas Lodge’s design, and Lucas Lodge was not willing to have the attempt known
till its success could be known likewise; for though feeling almost
secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging,
Lucas Lodge was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday.
Lucas Lodge’s
reception however was of the most flattering kind.
Miss Lucas perceived
Miss Lucas perceived from an upper window as Miss Lucas perceived walked towards the house, and instantly
set out to meet Miss Lucas perceived accidentally in the lane.
But little had Miss Lucas perceived dared
to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited Miss Lucas perceived’s there.


In as short a time as Mr. Collins's long speeches would allow, every
thing was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as they
entered the house, Mr. Collins earnestly entreated Mr. Collins’ to name the day that was
to make Mr. Collins the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must be
waved for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with Mr. Collins’
happiness.
The stupidity with which Mr. Collins was favoured by nature, must
guard Mr. Collins’ courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its
continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted Mr. Collins solely from the pure and
disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that
establishment were gained.


Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent;
and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity.
Mr. Collins's present
circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom
they could give little fortune; and Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent’s prospects of future wealth were
exceedingly fair.
Lady Lucas began directly to calculate with more
interest than the matter had ever excited before, how many years longer
Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and Sir William gave it as Mr. Collins should be in possession of the’s decided
opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins should be in possession of the
Longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both Mr. Collins should be in possession of the and Mr. Collins should be in possession of the’s wife
should make their appearance at St. James's.
The whole family in short
were properly overjoyed on the occasion.
The younger girls formed hopes
of _coming out_ a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have
done; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte's
dying an old maid.
Charlotte herself was tolerably composed.
Mr. Collins should be in possession of the had
gained Mr. Collins should be in possession of the’s point, and had time to consider of it.
Mr. Collins should be in possession of the’s reflections were
in general satisfactory.
Mr. Collins to be sure was neither sensible nor
agreeable; Mr. Collins to be sure was neither sensible nor’s society was irksome, and Mr. Collins to be sure was neither sensible nor’s attachment to Mr. Collins to be sure was neither sensible nor’s must be
imaginary.
But still Mr. Collins to be sure was neither sensible nor would be Mr. Collins to be sure was neither sensible nor’s husband.--Without thinking highly
either of men or of matrimony, marriage had always been Mr. Collins to be sure was neither sensible nor’s object; it
was the only honourable provision for well-educated young women of small
fortune, and however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their
pleasantest preservative from want.
This preservative Mr. Collins to be sure was neither sensible nor had now
obtained; and at the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been
handsome, Mr. Collins to be sure was neither sensible nor felt all the good luck of it.
The least agreeable
circumstance in the business, was the surprise it must occasion to
Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship Elizabeth Bennet valued beyond that of any other
person.
Elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame Elizabeth’s; and though
Elizabeth’s resolution was not to be shaken, Elizabeth’s feelings must be hurt by such
disapprobation.
Mr. Collins when he returned to Longbourn to dinner resolved to give Mr. Collins when Mr. Collins when he returned to Longbourn to dinner returned to Longbourn to dinner’s the information herself, and
therefore charged Mr. Collins when Mr. Collins when he returned to Longbourn to dinner returned to Longbourn to dinner,
to drop no hint of what had passed before any of the family.
A promise
of secrecy was of course very dutifully given, but it could not be kept
without difficulty; for the curiosity excited by Mr. Collins when Mr. Collins when he returned to Longbourn to dinner returned to Longbourn to dinner’s long absence, burst
forth in such very direct questions on Mr. Collins when Mr. Collins when he returned to Longbourn to dinner returned to Longbourn to dinner’s return, as required some
ingenuity to evade, and Mr. Collins when he returned to Longbourn to dinner was at the same time exercising great
self-denial, for Mr. Collins when he returned to Longbourn to dinner was longing to publish Mr. Collins when Mr. Collins when he returned to Longbourn to dinner returned to Longbourn to dinner’s prosperous love.


As Mrs. Bennet with great politeness and cordiality said was to begin Mrs. Bennet with great politeness and cordiality said’s journey too early on the morrow to see any of the
family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies moved
for the night; and Mrs. Bennet with great politeness and cordiality said
how happy they should be to see Mrs. Bennet with great politeness and cordiality said at Longbourn again, whenever Mrs. Bennet with great politeness and cordiality said’s
other engagements might allow Mrs. Bennet with great politeness and cordiality said to visit them.


"My dear Madam," Mrs. Bennet with great politeness and cordiality said replied, "this invitation is particularly
gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and you
may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as
possible.
"

They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish for
so speedy a return, immediately said,

"But is there not danger of Lady Catherine's disapprobation here, my
good sir?--You had better neglect your relations, than run the risk of
offending your patroness.
"

"My dear sir," replied Mr. Collins, "I am particularly obliged to you
for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so
material a step without Mr. Collins’ ladyship's concurrence.
"

"You cannot be too much on your guard.
Risk any thing rather than Mr. Collins’
displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us
again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home,
and be satisfied that _we_ shall take no offence.
"

"Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such
affectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily receive
from me a letter of thanks for this, as well as for every other mark of
your regard during my stay in Hertfordshire.
As for my fair cousins,
though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall
now take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting
my cousin Elizabeth.
"

With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally
surprised to find that Elizabeth meditated a quick return.
Mrs. Bennet wished
to understand by it that Mary thought of paying Mary’s addresses to one of
Mary’s younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept Mary.

Mary rated Mary’s abilities much higher than any of the others; there was a
solidity in Mary’s reflections which often struck Mary’s, and though by no
means so clever as herself, Mary thought that if encouraged to read and
improve himself by such an example as Mary’s's, Mary might become a very
agreeable companion.
But on the following morning, every hope of this
kind was done away.
Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a
private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.


The possibility of Mr. Collins's fancying himself in love with Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast’s
friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two; but
that Charlotte could encourage Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, seemed almost as far from
possibility as that Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast could encourage Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast herself, and Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast’s
astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first the
bounds of decorum, and Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast could not help crying out,

"Engaged to Mr. Collins!
my dear Charlotte,--impossible!
"

The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman’s
story, gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a
reproach; though, as it was no more than Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman expected, Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman soon
regained Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman’s composure, and calmly replied,

"Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza?--Do you think it incredible
that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman's good opinion,
because Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman was not so happy as to succeed with you?"

But Elizabeth had now recollected herself, and making a strong effort
for it, was able to assure Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman’s with tolerable firmness that the prospect
of their relationship was highly grateful to Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman’s, and that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman wished
Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman’s all imaginable happiness.


"I see what you are feeling," replied Charlotte,--"you must be
surprised, very much surprised,--so lately as Mr. Collins was wishing to
marry you.
But when you have had time to think it all over, I hope you
will be satisfied with what I have done.
I am not romantic you know.
I
never was.
I ask only a comfortable home; and considering Mr. Collins's
character, connections, and situation in life, I am convinced that my
chance of happiness with Mr. Collins is as fair, as most people can boast on
entering the marriage state.
"

Elizabeth quietly answered "Undoubtedly;"--and after an awkward pause,
they returned to the rest of the family.
Charlotte did not stay much
longer, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what Elizabeth had heard.
It
was a long time before Elizabeth became at all reconciled to the idea of so
unsuitable a match.
The strangeness of Mr. Collins's making two offers
of marriage within three days, was nothing in comparison of Elizabeth’s being
now accepted.
Elizabeth had always felt that Charlotte's opinion of matrimony
was not exactly like Elizabeth’s own, but Elizabeth could not have supposed it
possible that when called into action, Elizabeth would have sacrificed every
better feeling to worldly advantage.
Charlotte the wife of Mr. Collins,
was a most humiliating picture!--And to the pang of a friend disgracing
herself and sunk in CHAPTER XXIII’s esteem, was added the distressing conviction
that it was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot
CHAPTER XXIII had chosen.




CHAPTER XXIII.



Elizabeth was sitting with Sir William Lucas himself appeared’s mother and sisters, reflecting on what
Sir William Lucas himself appeared had heard, and doubting whether Sir William Lucas himself appeared were authorised to mention it,
when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by Sir William Lucas himself appeared’s daughter to
announce Sir William Lucas himself appeared’s engagement to the family.
With many compliments to them,
and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the
houses, Lydia unfolded the matter,--to an audience not merely wondering,
but incredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance than
politeness, protested Lydia must be entirely mistaken, and Lydia, always
unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed,

"Good Lord!
Sir William, how can you tell such a story?--Do not you know
that Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?"

Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne
without anger such treatment; but Sir William's good breeding carried
Mr. Collins through it all; and though Mr. Collins begged leave to be positive as to the
truth of Mr. Collins’ information, Mr. Collins listened to all their impertinence with the
most forbearing courtesy.

Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on Mr. Collins’ to relieve Mr. Collins from so unpleasant
a situation, now put herself forward to confirm Mr. Collins’ account, by
mentioning Mr. Collins’ prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and
endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of Mr. Collins’ mother and sisters,
by the earnestness of Mr. Collins’ congratulations to Sir William, in which Mr. Collins
was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the
happiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent character
of Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.


Mrs. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while
Sir William remained; but no sooner had Sir William remained left them than Sir William remained’s feelings
found a rapid vent.
In the first place, Sir William remained persisted in disbelieving
the whole of the matter; secondly, Sir William remained was very sure that Mr. Collins
had been taken in; thirdly, Sir William remained trusted that they would never be happy
together; and fourthly, that the match might be broken off.
Two
inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole; one, that
Elizabeth was the real cause of all the mischief; and the other, that
Elizabeth herself had been barbarously used by them all; and on these two
points Elizabeth principally dwelt during the rest of the day.
Nothing could
console and nothing appease Elizabeth’s.--Nor did that day wear out Elizabeth’s
resentment.
A week elapsed before Lady Lucas without being rude could see Elizabeth without
scolding Lady Lucas without being rude’s, a month passed away before Lady Lucas without being rude could speak to Sir William
or Lady Lucas without being rude, and many months were gone before Lady Lucas without being rude
could at all forgive their daughter.


Mr. Bennet's emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such
as Charlotte Lucas did experience Charlotte Lucas pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for
it gratified Charlotte Lucas, Charlotte Lucas said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom Charlotte Lucas had
been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as Charlotte Lucas’ wife, and
more foolish than Charlotte Lucas’ daughter!


Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match; but Jane said
less of Jane’s astonishment than of Jane’s earnest desire for their happiness;
nor could Elizabeth persuade Jane’s to consider it as improbable.
Kitty and
Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only a
clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news
to spread at Meryton.


Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort on
Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and Mrs. Bennet
called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy Mrs. Bennet was,
though Mrs. Bennet's sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been
enough to drive happiness away.


Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them
mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that no
real confidence could ever subsist between them again.
Bingley’s
disappointment in Charlotte made Bingley’s turn with fonder regard to Bingley’s
sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy Bingley was sure Bingley’s opinion could
never be shaken, and for whose happiness Bingley grew daily more anxious, as
Bingley had now been gone a week, and nothing was heard of Bingley’s return.


Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to Caroline’s letter, and was counting
the days till Caroline might reasonably hope to hear again.
The promised
letter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to their
father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a
twelvemonth's abode in the family might have prompted.
After discharging
Lady Catherine’s conscience on that head, Lady Catherine proceeded to inform them, with many
rapturous expressions, of Lady Catherine’s happiness in having obtained the affection
of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it was
merely with the view of enjoying Lady Catherine’s society that Lady Catherine had been so ready
to close with their kind wish of seeing Lady Catherine again at Longbourn, whither
Lady Catherine hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight; for Lady Catherine,
Lady Catherine added, so heartily approved Lady Catherine’s marriage, that Lady Catherine wished it to take
place as soon as possible, which Lady Catherine trusted would be an unanswerable
argument with Lady Catherine’s amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making Lady Catherine
the happiest of men.


Mr. Collins's return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of
pleasure to Mrs. Bennet.
On the contrary Mrs. Bennet was as much disposed to
complain of it as Mrs. Bennet’s husband.--It was very strange that Mrs. Bennet should come
to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient
and exceedingly troublesome.--Mrs. Bennet hated having visitors in the house
while Mrs. Bennet’s health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the
most disagreeable.
Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and they
gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley's continued
absence.


Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject.
Day after
day passed away without bringing any other tidings of Bennet than the
report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of Bennet’s coming no more to
Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs.
Bennet, and which Bennet never failed to contradict as a most scandalous
falsehood.


Even Elizabeth began to fear--not that Bingley was indifferent--but that
Bingley’s sisters would be successful in keeping Bingley away.
Unwilling as Bingley
was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane's happiness, and so
dishonourable to the stability of Bingley’s lover, Bingley could not prevent its
frequently recurring.
The united efforts of Darcy’s two unfeeling sisters
and of Darcy’s overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss
Darcy and the amusements of London, might be too much, Darcy feared, for
the strength of Darcy’s attachment.


As for Jane, _her_
anxiety under this suspence was, of course, more
painful than Elizabeth's; but whatever Elizabeth felt Elizabeth was desirous of
concealing, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject
was never alluded to.
But as no such delicacy restrained Elizabeth’s mother, an
hour seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not talk of Bingley, express Elizabeth’s
impatience for Elizabeth’s arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if Elizabeth
did not come back, Elizabeth should think herself very ill used.
It needed all
Jane's steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable
tranquillity.


Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight, but Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight’s
reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight’s
first introduction.
Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight was too happy, however, to need much attention;
and luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them
from a great deal of Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight’s company.
The chief of every day was spent by
Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight at Lucas Lodge, and Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time
to make an apology for Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight’s absence before the family went to bed.


Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state.
The very mention of any
thing concerning the match threw Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state’s into an agony of ill humour, and
wherever Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state went Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state was sure of hearing it talked of.
The sight of
Miss Lucas was odious to Miss Lucas was odious to her’s.
As Miss Lucas was odious to her’s successor in that house, Miss Lucas was odious to her
regarded Miss Lucas was odious to her’s with jealous abhorrence.
Whenever Charlotte came to see
them Mr. Bennet were dead concluded Mr. Bennet were dead’s to be anticipating the hour of possession; and
whenever Mr. Bennet were dead spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced that
they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself
and Mr. Bennet were dead’s daughters out of the house, as soon as Mr. Bennet were dead.
Mr. Bennet were dead
complained bitterly of all this to Mr. Bennet were dead’s husband.


"Indeed, Mr. Bennet," said Lucas, "it is very hard to think that Charlotte
Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that I should be forced to
make way for _her_, and live to see Lucas’ take my place in it!
"

"My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts.
Let us hope for
better things.
Let us flatter ourselves that _
I_ may be the survivor.
"

This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and, therefore, instead of
making any answer, Mrs. Bennet went on as before,

"I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate.
If it was
not for the entail I should not mind it.
"

"What should not you mind?"

"I should not mind any thing at all.
"

"Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such
insensibility.
"

"I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for any thing about the entail.

How any one could have the conscience to entail away an estate from
one's own daughters I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr.
Collins too!--Why should _he_ have it more than anybody else?"

"I leave it to yourself to determine," said Mr. Bennet.


END OF VOL.
I.





[Illustration: A VICARAGE HOUSE.]





PRIDE AND PREJUDICE:

A Novel.


In Three Volumes.


By the Author of "Sense and Sensibility."

VOL.
II.







London:
Printed for T. Egerton,
Military Library, Whitehall.
1813.





PRIDE & PREJUDICE.




CHAPTER I.


Miss Bingley's letter arrived, and put an end to doubt.
The very first
sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for
the winter, and concluded with Miss Bingley’s brother's regret at not having had
time to pay Miss Bingley’s respects to Miss Bingley’s friends in Hertfordshire before Miss Bingley left
the country.


Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of
the letter, Jane found little, except the professed affection of the
writer, that could give Jane’s any comfort.
Miss Darcy's praise occupied
the chief of it.
Caroline’s many attractions were again dwelt on, and Caroline
boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict
the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in Caroline’s former
letter.
Mr. Darcy wrote also with great pleasure of Mr. Darcy’s brother's being an
inmate of Mr. Darcy's house, and mentioned with raptures, some plans of
the latter with regard to new furniture.


Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this,
heard it in silent indignation.
Elizabeth’s heart was divided between concern
for Elizabeth’s sister, and resentment against all the others.
To Caroline's
assertion of Miss Darcy Miss Darcy she paid no paid no’s brother's being partial to Miss Darcy Miss Darcy she paid no paid no
credit.
That Jane was really fond of Jane, Jane doubted no more than Jane
had ever done; and much as Jane had always been disposed to like Jane, Jane
could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness
of temper, that want of proper resolution which now made Jane the slave
of Jane’s designing friends, and led Jane to sacrifice Jane’s own happiness to
the caprice of their inclinations.
Had Jane’s own happiness, however, been
the only sacrifice, Jane might have been allowed to sport with it in what
ever manner Jane thought best; but Jane’s sister's was involved in it, as Jane
thought Jane must be sensible himself.
It was a subject, in short, on
which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing.
Bingley
could think of nothing else, and yet whether Bingley's regard had really
died away, or were suppressed by Bingley’s friends' interference; whether Bingley
had been aware of Jane's attachment, or whether it had escaped Bingley’s
observation; whichever were the case, though Bingley’s opinion of Bingley must be
materially affected by the difference, Bingley’s sister's situation remained
the same, Bingley’s peace equally wounded.


A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of Mrs. Bennet’s feelings to
Elizabeth; but at last on Mrs. Bennet's leaving them together, after a
longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, Mrs. Bennet could
not help saying,

"Oh! that my dear mother had more command over herself; Mrs. Bennet can have no
idea of the pain Mrs. Bennet gives me by Mrs. Bennet’s continual reflections on Mrs. Bennet.
But I
will not repine.
It cannot last long.
Mrs. Bennet will be forgot, and we shall
all be as we were before.
"

Elizabeth looked at Mrs. Bennet’s sister with incredulous solicitude, but said
nothing.


"You doubt me," cried Jane, slightly colouring; "indeed you have no
reason.
Mrs. Bennet may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my
acquaintance, but that is all.
I have nothing either to hope or fear,
and nothing to reproach Mrs. Bennet with.
Thank God!
I have not _that_ pain.
A
little time therefore.--I shall certainly try to get the better.
"

With a stronger voice Mrs. Bennet soon added, "I have this comfort immediately,
that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it
has done no harm to any one but myself.
"

"My dear Jane!" exclaimed Elizabeth, "you are too good.
Your sweetness
and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say to
you.
I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you
deserve.
"

Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back
the praise on Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit’s sister's warm affection.


"Nay," said Elizabeth, "this is not fair.
_You_ wish to think all the
world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of any body.
_I_ only
want to think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself against it.
Do not be
afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your
privilege of universal good will.
You need not.
There are few people
whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well.
The more I see
of the world, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms
my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the
little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of either merit
or sense.
I have met with two instances lately; one I will not mention;
the other is Charlotte's marriage.
It is unaccountable!
in every view it
is unaccountable!"

"My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these.
They will
ruin your happiness.
You do not make allowance enough for difference of
situation and temper.
Consider Mr. Collins's respectability, and
Charlotte's prudent, steady character.
Remember that Mr. Collins is one of a
large family; that as to fortune, it is a most eligible match; and be
ready to believe, for every body's sake, that Mr. Collins may feel something
like regard and esteem for our cousin.
"

"To oblige you, I would try to believe almost any thing, but no one else
could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that
Charlotte had any regard for Mr. Collins, I should only think worse of Mr. Collins’
understanding, than I now do of Mr. Collins’ heart.
My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is
a conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know Mr. Collins is is, as well
as I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who marries
Mr. Collins is, cannot have a proper way of thinking.
You shall not defend Mr. Collins is’,
though it is Charlotte Lucas.
You shall not, for the sake of one
individual, change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor
endeavour to persuade yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and
insensibility of danger, security for happiness.
"

"I must think your language too strong in speaking of both," replied
Jane, "and I hope you will be convinced of it, by seeing them happy
together.
But enough of this.
You alluded to something else.
You
mentioned _two_ instances.
I cannot misunderstand you, but I intreat
you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that person_ to blame, and
saying your opinion of Mr. Collins is is sunk.
We must not be so ready to fancy
ourselves intentionally injured.
We must not expect a lively young man
to be always so guarded and circumspect.
It is very often nothing but
our own vanity that deceives us.
Women fancy admiration means more than
it does.
"

"And men take care that they should.
"

"If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea
of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.
"

"I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley's conduct to design,"
said Elizabeth; "but without scheming to do wrong, or to make others
unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery.
Thoughtlessness,
want of attention to other people's feelings, and want of resolution,
will do the business.
"

"And do you impute it to either of those?"

"Yes; to the last.
But if I go on, I shall displease you by saying what
I think of persons you esteem.
Stop me whilst you can.
"

"You persist, then, in supposing Mr. Bingley’s sisters influence Mr. Bingley.
"

"Yes, in conjunction with Mr. Bingley’s friend."

"I cannot believe it.
Why should they try to influence Mr. Bingley?
They can
only wish Mr. Bingley’s happiness, and if Mr. Bingley is attached to me, no other woman can
secure it.
"

"Your first position is false.
They may wish many things besides Mr. Bingley’s
happiness; they may wish Mr. Bingley’s increase of wealth and consequence; they
may wish Mr. Bingley to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great
connections, and pride.
"

"Beyond a doubt, they _do_ wish Miss Darcy to chuse Miss Darcy," replied Jane;
"but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing.
They have
known Miss Darcy’s much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love
Miss Darcy’s better.
But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely
they should have opposed their brother's.
What sister would think
herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very
objectionable?
If they believed Miss Darcy attached to me, they would not try
to part us; if Miss Darcy were so, they could not succeed.
By supposing such an
affection, you make every body acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most
unhappy.
Do not distress me by the idea.
I am not ashamed of having been
mistaken--or, at least, it is slight, it is nothing in comparison of
what I should feel in thinking ill of Miss Darcy or Miss Darcy’s sisters.
Let me take it
in the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.
"

Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley's
name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.


Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no’s returning no
more, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account
for it clearly, there seemed little chance of Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no’s ever considering it
with less perplexity.
Jane’s daughter endeavoured to convince Jane’s of what
Jane did not believe herself, that Jane’s attentions to Jane had been merely
the effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when Jane saw
Jane’s no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at
the time, Jane had the same story to repeat every day.
Mrs. Bennet's best
comfort was, that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.


Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently.
"So, Lizzy," said Lizzy one day,
"your sister is crossed in love I find.
I congratulate Lizzy’s.
Next to
being married, a girl likes to be crossed in love a little now and then.

It is something to think of, and gives Lizzy’s a sort of distinction among
Lizzy’s companions.
When is your turn to come?
You will hardly bear to be
long outdone by Jane.
Now is your time.
Here are officers enough at
Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country.
Let Wickham
be _your_ man.
Wickham is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.
"

"Thank you, Sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me.
We must not
all expect Jane's good fortune.
"

"True," said Mr. Bennet, "but it is a comfort to think that, whatever of
that kind may befal you, you have an affectionate mother who will always
make the most of it.
"

Mr. Wickham's society was of material service in dispelling the gloom,
which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn
family.
They saw Longbourn often, and to Longbourn’s other recommendations was now
added that of general unreserve.
The whole of what Elizabeth had already
heard, Mr. Darcy before they’s claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that Mr. Darcy before they had suffered from Mr. Darcy before they,
was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and every body was
pleased to think how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they
had known any thing of the matter.


Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any
extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the society of
Hertfordshire; Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men’s mild and steady candour always pleaded for
allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes--but by everybody else
Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.




CHAPTER II.



After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity, Mr.
Collins was called from Collins’ amiable Charlotte by the arrival of
Saturday.
The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on Collins’
side, by preparations for the reception of Collins’ bride, as Collins had reason
to hope, that shortly after Collins’ next return into Hertfordshire, the day
would be fixed that was to make Collins the happiest of men.
Collins took leave
of Collins’ relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished
Collins’ fair cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father
another letter of thanks.


On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving her’s
brother and Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving her’s’s wife, who came as usual to spend the Christmas at
Longbourn.
Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentleman-like man, greatly
superior to Mr. Gardiner was a sensible’s sister, as well by nature as education.
The Netherfield
ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by
trade, and within view of Mr. Gardiner was a sensible’s own warehouses, could have been so well
bred and agreeable.
Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger than
Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Philips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant
woman, and a great favourite with all Longbourn’s Longbourn nieces.
Between the
two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a very particular
regard.
They had frequently been staying with Longbourn’s in town.


The first part of Mrs. Gardiner's business on Longbourn’s arrival, was to
distribute Longbourn’s presents and describe the newest fashions.
When this was
done, Longbourn had a less active part to play.
It became Longbourn’s turn to listen.

Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of.
They
had all been very ill-used since Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate last saw Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate’s sister.
Two of Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate’s
girls had been on the point of marriage, and after all there was nothing
in it.


"I do not blame Jane," Bingley continued, "for Jane would have got Mr.
Bingley, if Bingley could.
But, Lizzy!
Oh, sister!
it is very hard to think
that Mr. Collins might have been Mr. Collins's wife by this time, had not it
been for Mr. Collins’ own perverseness.
Mr. Collins made Mr. Collins’ an offer in this very room,
and Mr. Collins refused Mr. Collins.
The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have
a daughter married before I have, and that Longbourn estate is just as
much entailed as ever.
The Lucases are very artful people indeed,
sister.
They are all for what they can get.
I am sorry to say it of
them, but so it is.
It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted
so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
before anybody else.
However, your coming just at this time is the
greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us, of
long sleeves.
"

Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before, in
the course of Jane and Elizabeth's correspondence with Elizabeth’s, made Elizabeth’s
sister a slight answer, and in compassion to Elizabeth’s nieces turned the
conversation.


When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, Elizabeth spoke more on the subject.
"It
seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane," said Elizabeth.
"I am
sorry it went off.
But these things happen so often!
A young man, such
as you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty girl
for a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgets
Mr. Bingley’s, that these sort of inconstancies are very frequent.
"

"An excellent consolation in its way," said Elizabeth, "but it will not
do for _us_.
We do not suffer by _accident_.
It does not often happen
that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of
independent fortune to think no more of a girl, whom Mr. Bingley was violently in
love with only a few days before.
"

"But that expression of 'violently in love' is so hackneyed, so
doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea.
It is as
often applied to feelings which arise from an half-hour's acquaintance,
as to a real, strong attachment.
Pray, how _violent was_
Mr. Bingley's
love?"

"I never saw a more promising inclination.
Mr. Bingley was growing quite
inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by Mr. Bingley’s.
Every time
they met, it was more decided and remarkable.
At Mr. Bingley’s own ball Mr. Bingley
offended two or three young ladies, by not asking them to dance, and I
spoke to Mr. Bingley twice myself, without receiving an answer.
Could there be
finer symptoms?
Is not general incivility the very essence of love?
"

"Oh, yes!--of that kind of love which I suppose Mr. Bingley to have felt.
Poor
Jane!
I am sorry for Mr. Bingley’s, because, with Mr. Bingley’s disposition, Mr. Bingley may not get
over it immediately.
It had better have happened to _you_, Lizzy; you
would have laughed yourself out of it sooner.
But do you think Lizzy
would be prevailed on to go back with us?
Change of scene might be of
service--and perhaps a little relief from home, may be as useful as
anything.
"

Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded
of Lizzy’s sister's ready acquiescence.


"I hope," added Mrs. Gardiner, "that no consideration with regard to
this young man will influence Lizzy’s.
We live in so different a part of
town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go
out so little, that it is very improbable they should meet at all,
unless Lizzy really comes to see Lizzy’s.
"

"And _that_ is quite impossible; for Mr. Darcy would no more suffer Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a to call on Jane in such a is now in the custody of Mr. Darcy would no more suffer Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a to call on Jane in such a’s
friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a to call on Jane in such a
part of London!
My dear aunt, how could you think of it?
Mr. Darcy may
perhaps have _heard_ of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but Mr. Darcy may would
hardly think a month's ablution enough to cleanse Mr. Darcy may from its
impurities, were Mr. Darcy may once to enter it; and depend upon it, Mr. Bingley
never stirs without Mr. Darcy may.
"

"So much the better.
I hope they will not meet at all.
But does not Jane
correspond with the sister?
_
She_ will not be able to help calling.
"

"Jane will drop the acquaintance entirely.
"

But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this
point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley's being
withheld from seeing Jane, Elizabeth felt a solicitude on the subject which
convinced Elizabeth’s, on examination, that Elizabeth did not consider it entirely
hopeless.
It was possible, and sometimes Elizabeth thought it probable, that
Elizabeth’s affection might be re-animated, and the influence of Elizabeth’s friends
successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane's
attractions.


Miss Bennet accepted Caroline’s aunt's invitation with pleasure; and the
Bingleys were no otherwise in Caroline’s thoughts at the time, than as Caroline
hoped that, by Caroline's not living in the same house with Caroline’s brother,
Caroline might occasionally spend a morning with Caroline’s, without any danger of
seeing Caroline.


The Gardiners staid a week at Longbourn; and what with the Philipses,
the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its
engagement.
Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment
of Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment’s brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family
dinner.
When the engagement was for home, some of the officers always
made part of it, of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and
on these occasions, Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth's
warm commendation of Elizabeth, narrowly observed them both.
Without supposing
them, from what Elizabeth saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference
of each other was plain enough to make Elizabeth’s a little uneasy; and Elizabeth
resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before Elizabeth left
Hertfordshire, and represent to Elizabeth’s the imprudence of encouraging such
an attachment.


To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure,
unconnected with Wickham’s general powers.
About ten or a dozen years ago,
before Wickham’s marriage, Wickham had spent a considerable time in that very part
of Derbyshire, to which Wickham belonged.
They had, therefore, many
acquaintance in common; and, though Wickham had been little there since
the death of Darcy's father, five years before, it was yet in Darcy’s power
to give Darcy’s fresher intelligence of Darcy’s former friends, than Darcy had
been in the way of procuring.


Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by
character perfectly well.
Here consequently was an inexhaustible subject
of discourse.
In comparing Mr. Darcy by’s recollection of Pemberley, with the
minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing Mr. Darcy by’s
tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, Mr. Darcy by was
delighting both Mr. Darcy by and herself.
On being made acquainted with the
present Mr. Darcy's treatment of Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud tried to remember something of
that gentleman's reputed disposition when quite a lad, which might agree
with it, and was confident at last, that Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud recollected having heard
Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured
boy.




CHAPTER III.



Mrs. Gardiner's caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on
the first favourable opportunity of speaking to Lizzy’s alone; after
honestly telling Lizzy’s what Lizzy thought, Lizzy thus went on:

"You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you
are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking
openly.
Seriously, I would have you be on your guard.
Do not involve
yourself, or endeavour to involve Lizzy in an affection which the want of
fortune would make so very imprudent.
I have nothing to say against
_him_; Lizzy is a most interesting young man; and if Lizzy had the fortune Lizzy
ought to have, I should think you could not do better.
But as it is--you
must not let your fancy run away with you.
You have sense, and we all
expect you to use it.
Your father would depend on _your_ resolution and
good conduct, I am sure.
You must not disappoint your father.
"

"My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.
"

"Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.
"

"Well, then, you need not be under any alarm.
I will take care of
myself, and of Mr. Wickham too.
Mr. Wickham too shall not be in love with me, if I
can prevent it.
"

"Elizabeth, you are not serious now.
"

"I beg your pardon.
I will try again.
At present I am not in love with
Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly am not.
But Mr. Wickham is, beyond all comparison,
the most agreeable man I ever saw--and if Mr. Wickham becomes really attached to
me--I believe it will be better that Mr. Wickham should not.
I see the imprudence
of it.--Oh!
_that_ abominable Mr. Darcy!--My father's opinion of me does
me the greatest honour; and I should be miserable to forfeit it.
My
father, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham.
In short, my dear aunt, I
should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but
since we see every day that where there is affection, young people are
seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune, from entering into
engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so many
of my fellow creatures if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that it
would be wisdom to resist?
All that I can promise you, therefore, is not
to be in a hurry.
I will not be in a hurry to believe myself Mr. Wickham’s first
object.
When I am in company with Mr. Wickham, I will not be wishing.
In short,
I will do my best.
"

"Perhaps it will be as well, if you discourage Mr. Wickham’s coming here so very
often.
At least, you should not _remind_
your Mother of inviting Mr. Wickham.
"

"As I did the other day," said Elizabeth, with a conscious smile; "very
true, it will be wise in me to refrain from _that_.
But do not imagine
that Mr. Wickham is always here so often.
It is on your account that Mr. Wickham has been
so frequently invited this week.
You know my mother's ideas as to the
necessity of constant company for Mr. Wickham’s friends.
But really, and upon my
honour, I will try to do what I think to be wisest; and now, I hope you
are satisfied.
"

Mr. Wickham’s aunt assured Mr. Wickham’s that Mr. Wickham was; and Elizabeth having thanked Mr. Wickham’s for
the kindness of Mr. Wickham’s hints, they parted; a wonderful instance of advice
being given on such a point, without being resented.


Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted
by the Gardiners and Jane; but as Mrs. Bennet took up Mrs. Bennet’s abode with the Lucases,
Mrs. Bennet’s arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet.
Mrs. Bennet’s marriage was
now fast approaching, and Mrs. Bennet was at length so far resigned as to think
it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say in an ill-natured tone that
Mrs. Bennet "_wished_
they might be happy."
Thursday was to be the wedding day,
and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid Elizabeth’s farewell visit; and when Elizabeth rose
to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of Elizabeth’s mother's ungracious and
reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied Elizabeth’s
out of the room.
As they went down stairs together, Charlotte said,

"I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza.
"

"_That_ you certainly shall."


"And I have another favour to ask.
Will you come and see me?"

"We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire.
"

"I am not likely to leave Kent for some time.
Promise me, therefore, to
come to Hunsford.
"

Elizabeth could not refuse, though Kent foresaw little pleasure in the
visit.


"My father and Maria are to come to me in March," added Charlotte, "and
I hope you will consent to be of the party.
Indeed, Eliza, you will be
as welcome to me as either of them.
"

The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from
the church door, and every body had as much to say or to hear on the
subject as usual.
Elizabeth soon heard from Maria’s friend; and their
correspondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been; that it
should be equally unreserved was impossible.
Elizabeth could never
address Maria’s without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over,
and, though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the
sake of what had been, rather than what was.
Charlotte's first letters
were received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be
curiosity to know how Lady Catherine would speak of Lady Catherine’s new home, how Lady Catherine would
like Lady Catherine, and how happy Lady Catherine would dare pronounce herself to
be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte
expressed herself on every point exactly as Lady Catherine might have foreseen.
Lady Catherine
wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing
which Lady Catherine could not praise.
The house, furniture, neighbourhood, and
roads, were all to Lady Catherine's’ taste, and Lady Catherine's behaviour was most
friendly and obliging.
It was Mr. Collins's picture of Hunsford and
Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that Elizabeth must wait
for Elizabeth’s own visit there, to know the rest.


Jane had already written a few lines to Jane’s sister to announce their
safe arrival in London; and when Jane wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it
would be in Jane’s power to say something of the Bingleys.


Jane’s impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience
generally is.
Jane had been a week in town, without either seeing or
hearing from Caroline.
Longbourn accounted for it, however, by supposing that
Longbourn’s last letter to Longbourn’s friend from Longbourn, had by some accident been
lost.


"My aunt," Longbourn continued, "is going to-morrow into that part of the
town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor-street.
"

Miss Bingley wrote again when the visit was paid, and Miss Bingley had seen Miss Bingley.

"I did not think Caroline in spirits," were Miss Bingley’s words, "but Miss Bingley was very
glad to see me, and reproached me for giving Miss Bingley’s no notice of my coming
to London.
I was right, therefore; my last letter had never reached Miss Bingley’s.

I enquired after their brother, of course.
Mr. Darcy was well, but so much
engaged with Mr. Darcy, that they scarcely ever saw Mr. Darcy.
I found that
Miss Darcy was expected to dinner.
I wish I could see Miss Darcy was expected to dinner’s.
My visit was
not long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out.
I dare say I shall
soon see them here.
"

Elizabeth shook Elizabeth’s head over this letter.
It convinced Mr. Bingley her sister’s, that
accident only could discover to Mr. Bingley Mr. Bingley her sister’s sister's being in town.


Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of Jane.
Miss Bingley endeavoured to
persuade herself that Miss Bingley did not regret it; but Miss Bingley could no longer be
blind to Miss Bingley's inattention.
After waiting at home every morning
for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for Miss Bingley’s, the
visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of Miss Bingley’s stay, and yet more,
the alteration of Miss Bingley’s manner, would allow Jane to deceive herself no
longer.
The letter which Miss Bingley wrote on this occasion to Miss Bingley’s sister, will
prove what Miss Bingley felt.

     
"My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in
     Lizzy’s better judgment, at my expence, when I confess myself to have
     been entirely deceived in Miss Bingley's regard for me.
But, my
     dear sister, though the event has proved you right, do not think me
     obstinate if I still assert, that, considering what Lizzy’s behaviour
     was, my confidence was as natural as your suspicion.
I do not at
     all comprehend Lizzy’s reason for wishing to be intimate with me, but
     if the same circumstances were to happen again, I am sure I should
     be deceived again.
Caroline did not return my visit till yesterday;
     and not a note, not a line, did I receive in the mean time.
When
     Caroline did come, it was very evident that Caroline had no pleasure in it;
     Caroline made a slight, formal, apology, for not calling before, said
     not a word of wishing to see me again, and was in every respect so
     altered a creature, that when Caroline went away, I was perfectly
     resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer.
I pity, though I
     cannot help blaming Caroline’s.
Caroline was very wrong in singling me out as
     Caroline did; I can safely say, that every advance to intimacy began on
     Caroline’s side.
But I pity Caroline’s, because Caroline must feel that Caroline has been
     acting wrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for Caroline’s
     brother is the cause of it.
I need not explain myself farther; and
     though _we_ know this anxiety to be quite needless, yet if Caroline
     feels it, it will easily account for Caroline’s behaviour to me; and so
     deservedly dear as Caroline is to Caroline’s sister, whatever anxiety Caroline may
     feel on Caroline’s behalf, is natural and amiable.
I cannot but wonder,
     however, at Caroline’s having any such fears now, because, if Caroline had at
     all cared about me, we must have met long, long ago.
Miss Darcy knows of my
     being in town, I am certain, from something Miss Darcy said herself; and
     yet it should seem by Miss Darcy’s manner of talking, as if Miss Darcy wanted to
     persuade herself that Miss Darcy is really partial to Miss Darcy.
I cannot
     understand it.
If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I should
     be almost tempted to say, that there is a strong appearance of
     duplicity in all this.
But I will endeavour to banish every painful
     thought, and think only of what will make me happy, your affection,
     and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt.
Let me hear
     from you very soon.
Miss Bingley said something of Miss Bingley said something of his never’s never
     returning to Netherfield again, of giving up the house, but not
     with any certainty.
We had better not mention it.
I am extremely
     glad that you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at
     Hunsford.
Pray go to see them, with Sir William and Maria.
I am
     sure you will be very comfortable there.

     
"Your's, &c."

This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but Jane’s spirits returned as Jane
considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least.

All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over.
Jane would not
even wish for any renewal of Jane’s attentions.
Wickham’s character sunk on every
review of it; and as a punishment for Wickham, as well as a possible
advantage to Jane, Wickham seriously hoped Wickham might really soon marry Mr.
Darcy's sister, as, by Wickham's account, Wickham would make Wickham abundantly
regret what Wickham had thrown away.


Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise’s promise
concerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabeth had
such to send as might rather give contentment to Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise’s aunt than to
herself.
Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise’s promise’s apparent partiality had subsided, Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise’s promise’s attentions were over,
Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise was the admirer of some one else.
Elizabeth was watchful enough to
see it all, but Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise could see it and write of it without material pain.

Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise’s heart had been but slightly touched, and Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise’s vanity was satisfied
with believing that _she_ would have been Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise’s promise’s only choice, had fortune
permitted it.
The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most
remarkable charm of the young lady, to whom Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise was now rendering himself
agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise’s promise’s case than
in Charlotte's, did not quarrel with Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise for Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise’s promise’s wish of independence.

Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and while able to
suppose that it cost Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise a few struggles to relinquish Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise’s, Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise was
ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very
sincerely wish Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise happy.


All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relating the
circumstances, Mrs. Gardiner thus went on:--"I am now convinced, my dear aunt,
that I have never been much in love; for had I really experienced that
pure and elevating passion, I should at present detest Mrs. Gardiner’s very name,
and wish Mrs. Gardiner all manner of evil.
But my feelings are not only cordial
towards _him_; they are even impartial towards Miss King.
I cannot find
out that I hate Miss King’s at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think
Miss King’s a very good sort of girl.
There can be no love in all this.
My
watchfulness has been effectual; and though I should certainly be a more
interesting object to all my acquaintance, were I distractedly in love
with Miss King, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance.

Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly.
Kitty and Lydia take
Lydia’s defection much more to heart than I do.
They are young in the ways
of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that
handsome young men must have something to live on, as well as the
plain.
"




CHAPTER IV.



With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise
diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and
sometimes cold, did January and February pass away.
March was to take
Elizabeth to Hunsford.
Elizabeth had not at first thought very seriously of
going thither; but Charlotte, Elizabeth soon found, was depending on the plan,
and Elizabeth gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure
as well as greater certainty.
Absence had increased Mr. Collins’ desire of seeing
Charlotte again, and weakened Mr. Collins’ disgust of Mr. Collins.
There was
novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such
uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change
was not unwelcome for its own sake.
The journey would moreover give Jane’s
a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, Jane would have
been very sorry for any delay.
Every thing, however, went on smoothly,
and was finally settled according to Charlotte's first sketch.
Sir William and his second daughter was
to accompany Sir William and Sir William and his second daughter’s second daughter.
The improvement of
spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became
perfect as plan could be.


The only pain was in leaving Sir William and his second daughter’s father, who would certainly miss Sir William and his second daughter’s,
and who, when it came to the point, so little liked Sir William and his second daughter’s going, that Sir William and his second daughter
told Sir William and his second daughter’s to write to Sir William and his second daughter, and almost promised to answer Sir William and his second daughter’s letter.


The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on
Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly’s side even more.
Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s present pursuit could not make Lady Catherine de Bourgh forget that
Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s attention, the
first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s manner
of bidding Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s adieu, wishing Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s every enjoyment, reminding Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s of what
Lady Catherine de Bourgh was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their
opinion of Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s--their opinion of every body--would always coincide,
there was a solicitude, an interest which Lady Catherine de Bourgh felt must ever attach Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s
to Lady Catherine de Bourgh with a most sincere regard; and Lady Catherine de Bourgh parted from Lady Catherine de Bourgh convinced,
that whether married or single, Lady Catherine de Bourgh must always be Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s model of the
amiable and pleasing.


Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s fellow-travellers the next day, were not of a kind to make Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s think
Lady Catherine de Bourgh less agreeable.
Sir William Lucas, and Maria’s daughter Maria, a good
humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say that
could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much delight
as the rattle of the chaise.
Elizabeth loved absurdities, but Sir William had
known Sir William's too long.
Sir William could tell Sir William’s nothing new of the
wonders of Sir William’s presentation and knighthood; and Sir William’s civilities were worn
out like Sir William’s information.


It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early
as to be in Gracechurch-street by noon.
As they drove to Mr. Gardiner's
door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival; when
they entered the passage Jane was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth,
looking earnestly in Jane’s face, was pleased to see it healthful and
lovely as ever.
On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls,
whose eagerness for their cousin's appearance would not allow them to
wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen Jane’s
for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower.
All was joy and
kindness.
The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and
shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.


Elizabeth then contrived to sit by Jane’s aunt.
Their first subject was Jane’s
sister; and Jane was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to
Jane’s minute enquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support Jane’s
spirits, there were periods of dejection.
It was reasonable, however, to
hope, that they would not continue long.
Mrs. Gardiner gave Miss Bingley’s the
particulars also of Miss Bingley's visit in Gracechurch-street, and
repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and
herself, which proved that the former had, from Miss Bingley’s heart, given up the
acquaintance.


Mrs. Gardiner then rallied Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham’s niece on Wickham's desertion, and
complimented Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham’s on bearing it so well.


"But, my dear Elizabeth," Miss King added, "what sort of girl is Miss King?
I
should be sorry to think our friend mercenary.
"

"Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs,
between the mercenary and the prudent motive?
Where does discretion end,
and avarice begin?
Last Christmas you were afraid of Miss King’s marrying me,
because it would be imprudent; and now, because Miss King is trying to get a
girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that Miss King is
mercenary.
"

"If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know
what to think.
"

"Miss King is is a very good kind of girl, I believe.
I know no harm of Miss King is’.
"

"But Miss King is paid Miss King is’ not the smallest attention, till Miss King is’ grandfather's
death made Miss King is’ mistress of this fortune.
"

"No--why should Miss King is?
If it was not allowable for Miss King is to gain _my_
affections, because I had no money, what occasion could there be for
making love to a girl whom Miss King is did not care about, and who was equally
poor?"


"But there seems indelicacy in directing Miss King is’ attentions towards Miss King is’, so
soon after this event.
"

"A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant
decorums which other people may observe.
If _she_ does not object to it,
why should _we_?
"

"_Her_ not objecting, does not justify _him_.
It only shews Miss King is’ being
deficient in something herself--sense or feeling.
"

"Well," cried Elizabeth, "have it as you choose.
_He_ shall be
mercenary, and _she_ shall be foolish.
"

"No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose.
I should be sorry, you know,
to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire.
"

"Oh! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in
Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not
much better.
I am sick of them all.
Thank Heaven!
I am going to-morrow
where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has
neither manner nor sense to recommend Lizzy.
Stupid men are the only ones
worth knowing, after all.
"

"Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment.
"

Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, savours had the
unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany savours’ uncle and aunt in
a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer.


"We have not quite determined how far it shall carry us," said Mrs.
Gardiner, "but perhaps to the Lakes.
"

No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and Elizabeth’s
acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful.
"My dear, dear
aunt," Elizabeth rapturously cried, "what delight!
what felicity!
You give me
fresh life and vigour.
Adieu to disappointment and spleen.
What are men
to rocks and mountains?
Oh!
what hours of transport we shall spend!
And
when we _do_ return, it shall not be like other travellers, without
being able to give one accurate idea of any thing.
We _will_ know where
we have gone--we _will_ recollect what we have seen.
Lakes, mountains,
and rivers, shall not be jumbled together in our imaginations; nor, when
we attempt to describe any particular scene, will we begin quarrelling
about its relative situation.
Let _our_ first effusions be less
insupportable than those of the generality of travellers.
"




CHAPTER V.


Every object in the next day's journey was new and interesting to
Elizabeth; and Elizabeth’s spirits were in a state for enjoyment; for Elizabeth had
seen Elizabeth’s sister looking so well as to banish all fear for Elizabeth’s health,
and the prospect of Elizabeth’s northern tour was a constant source of delight.


When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was in
search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.

The paling of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side.
Elizabeth
smiled at the recollection of all that Elizabeth had heard of its inhabitants.


At length the Parsonage was discernible.
The garden sloping to the road,
the house standing in it, the green pales and the laurel hedge, every
thing declared they were arriving.
Mr. Collins and Charlotte appeared at
the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate, which led by a
short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of the whole
party.
In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing at the
sight of each other.
Mrs. Collins welcomed Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s friend with the liveliest
pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with coming, when
Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest found herself so affectionately received.
Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest saw instantly that Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s
cousin's manners were not altered by Mrs. Collins welcomed Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s friend with the liveliest’s marriage; Mrs. Collins welcomed Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s friend with the liveliest’s formal civility
was just what it had been, and Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest detained Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s some minutes at the gate
to hear and satisfy Mrs. Collins welcomed Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s friend with the liveliest’s enquiries after all Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s family.
They were then,
with no other delay than Mrs. Collins welcomed Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s friend with the liveliest’s pointing out the neatness of the entrance,
taken into the house; and as soon as they were in the parlour, Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest
welcomed them a second time with ostentatious formality to Mrs. Collins welcomed Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s friend with the liveliest’s humble
abode, and punctually repeated all Mrs. Collins welcomed Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s friend with the liveliest’s wife's offers of refreshment.


Elizabeth was prepared to see Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest in Mrs. Collins welcomed Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s friend with the liveliest’s glory; and Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest could not help
fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its aspect
and its furniture, Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest addressed himself particularly to Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s, as if
wishing to make Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s feel what Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest had lost in refusing Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest.
But though
every thing seemed neat and comfortable, Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest was not able to gratify Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest
by any sigh of repentance; and rather looked with wonder at Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest’s friend
that Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest could have so cheerful an air, with such a companion.
When Mr.
Collins said any thing of which Collins’ wife might reasonably be ashamed,
which certainly was not unseldom, Collins involuntarily turned Collins’ eye on
Charlotte.
Once or twice Collins could discern a faint blush; but in general
Charlotte wisely did not hear.
After sitting long enough to admire every
article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to the fender, to
give an account of their journey and of all that had happened in London,
Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden, which was large
and well laid out, and to the cultivation of which Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden attended himself.

To work in Elizabeth’s garden was one of Elizabeth’s most respectable pleasures; and
Elizabeth admired the command of countenance with which Charlotte talked
of the healthfulness of the exercise, and owned Elizabeth encouraged it as
much as possible.
Here, leading the way through every walk and cross
walk, and scarcely allowing them an interval to utter the praises Elizabeth
asked for, every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left
beauty entirely behind.
Elizabeth could number the fields in every direction,
and could tell how many trees there were in the most distant clump.
But
of all the views which Elizabeth’s garden, or which the country, or the kingdom
could boast, none were to be compared with the prospect of Rosings,
afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly
opposite the front of Elizabeth’s house.
It was a handsome modern building, well
situated on rising ground.


From Sir William accompanied Sir William accompanied him’s garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round Sir William accompanied Sir William accompanied him’s two meadows,
but the ladies not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white
frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte
took Sir William accompanied Sir William accompanied him’s sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased,
probably, to have the opportunity of shewing it without Sir William accompanied Sir William accompanied him’s husband's
help.
It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and every
thing was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of
which Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit.
When Mr. Collins could be
forgotten, there was really a great air of comfort throughout, and by
Charlotte's evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed Mr. Collins could be must be often
forgotten.


Lady Catherine was still in the country had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country.
It
was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining
in, observed,

"Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine
de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will
be delighted with Lady Catherine
de Bourgh’s.
Lady Catherine
de Bourgh is all affability and condescension, and I
doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of Lady Catherine
de Bourgh’s notice when
service is over.
I have scarcely any hesitation in saying that Maria will
include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which Maria
honours us during your stay here.
Charlotte’s behaviour to my dear Charlotte is
charming.
We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to
walk home.
Charlotte’s ladyship's carriage is regularly ordered for us.
I
_should_ say, one of Charlotte’s ladyship's carriages, for Charlotte has several.
"

"Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed," added
Charlotte, "and a most attentive neighbour.
"

"Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say.
Lady Catherine is a very respectable is the sort of
woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.
"

The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news, and
telling again what had been already written; and when it closed,
Elizabeth in the solitude of Elizabeth’s chamber had to meditate upon
Charlotte's degree of contentment, to understand Elizabeth’s address in guiding,
and composure in bearing with Elizabeth’s husband, and to acknowledge that it
was all done very well.
Mr. Collins had also to anticipate how Mr. Collins’ visit would
pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employments, the vexatious
interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with
Rosings.
A lively imagination soon settled it all.


About the middle of the next day, as Mr. Collins was in Mr. Collins’ room getting ready
for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in
confusion; and after listening a moment, Mr. Collins heard somebody running up
stairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after Mr. Collins’.
Eliza opened the
door, and met Maria in the landing place, who, breathless with
agitation, cried out,

"Oh, my dear Eliza!
pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for
there is such a sight to be seen!
I will not tell you what it is.
Make
haste, and come down this moment.
"

Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell Maria’s nothing more,
and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the lane, in quest
of this wonder; it was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the
garden gate.


"And is this all?" cried Elizabeth.
"I expected at least that the pigs
were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and Lady Catherine and her’s
daughter!"


"La! my dear," said Maria quite shocked at the mistake, "it is not Lady
Catherine.
The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them.
The
other is Miss De Bourgh.
Only look at Miss De Bourgh’s.
Miss De Bourgh is quite a little
creature.
Who would have thought Miss De Bourgh could be so thin and small!"

"Miss De Bourgh is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind.

Why does Charlotte not come in?"

"Oh! Charlotte says, Charlotte hardly ever does.
It is the greatest of favours
when Miss De Bourgh comes in.
"

"I like Elizabeth’s appearance," said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas.
"Elizabeth
looks sickly and cross.--Yes, Elizabeth will do for Elizabeth very well.
Elizabeth will
make Elizabeth a very proper wife.
"

Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in
conversation with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth's high
diversion, was stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the
greatness before Sir William, and constantly bowing whenever Miss De Bourgh
looked that way.


At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and
the others returned into the house.
Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two
girls than Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which
Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked
to dine at Rosings the next day.




CHAPTER VI.



Mr. Collins's triumph in consequence of this invitation was complete.

The power of displaying the grandeur of Lady
Catherine’s patroness to Lady
Catherine’s wondering
visitors, and of letting them see Lady
Catherine’s civility towards himself and Lady
Catherine’s
wife, was exactly what Lady
Catherine had wished for; and that an opportunity of
doing it should be given so soon, was such an instance of Lady
Catherine's condescension as Lady
Catherine knew not how to admire enough.


"I confess," said Lady
Catherine, "that I should not have been at all surprised by
Lady
Catherine’s Ladyship's asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at
Rosings.
I rather expected, from my knowledge of Lady
Catherine’s affability, that it
would happen.
But who could have foreseen such an attention as this?
Who
could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there
(an invitation moreover including the whole party) so immediately after
your arrival!
"

"I am the less surprised at what has happened," replied Sir William,
"from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which
my situation in life has allowed me to acquire.
About the Court, such
instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.
"

Scarcely any thing was talked of the whole day or next morning, but
their visit to Rosings.
Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in
what they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many
servants, and so splendid a dinner might not wholly overpower them.


When the ladies were separating for the toilette, Elizabeth said to Elizabeth,

"Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel.
Lady
Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us, which
becomes herself and daughter.
I would advise you merely to put on
whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest, there is no occasion
for any thing more.
Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for
being simply dressed.
Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for likes to have the distinction of rank
preserved.
"

While they were dressing, Maria Lucas came two or three times to their different
doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much
objected to be kept waiting for Maria Lucas’ dinner.--Such formidable accounts of
Maria Lucas’ Ladyship, and Maria Lucas’ manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas,
who had been little used to company, and Maria Lucas looked forward to Maria Lucas’
introduction at Rosings, with as much apprehension, as Maria Lucas’ father had
done to Maria Lucas’ presentation at St. James's.


As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile
across the park.--Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and
Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though Sir Lewis De Bourgh could not be in such
raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but
slightly affected by Sir Lewis De Bourgh’s enumeration of the windows in front of the
house, and Sir Lewis De Bourgh’s relation of what the glazing altogether had originally
cost Sir Lewis De Bourgh.


When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria's alarm was every
moment increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly
calm.--Elizabeth's courage did not fail Sir William did not look perfectly’s.
Lady Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or had heard nothing of
Lady Catherine that spoke Lady Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or’s awful from any extraordinary talents or
miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money and rank, Lady Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or
thought Lady Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or could witness without trepidation.


From the entrance hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a
rapturous air, the fine proportion and finished ornaments, they followed
the servants through an anti-chamber, to the room where Lady Catherine,
Mrs. Collins had settled it’s daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting.--Mrs. Collins had settled it’s Ladyship, with great
condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had settled it
with Mrs. Collins had settled it’s husband that the office of introduction should be Mrs. Collins had settled it’s's, it was
performed in a proper manner, without any of those apologies and thanks
which Mrs. Collins had settled it would have thought necessary.


In spite of having been at St. James's, Sir William was so completely
awed, by the grandeur surrounding Sir William was so completely, that Sir William was so completely had but just courage
enough to make a very low bow, and take Sir William was so completely’s seat without saying a word;
and Sir William was so completely’s daughter, frightened almost out of Sir William was so completely’s senses, sat on the edge
of Sir William was so completely’s chair, not knowing which way to look.
Elizabeth found herself
quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before Catherine’s
composedly.--Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with
strongly-marked features, which might once have been handsome.
Catherine’s air
was not conciliating, nor was Catherine’s manner of receiving them, such as to
make Catherine’s visitors forget their inferior rank.
Lady Catherine to be exactly what he had was not rendered
formidable by silence; but whatever Lady Catherine to be exactly what he had said, was spoken in so
authoritative a tone, as marked Lady Catherine to be exactly what Lady Catherine to be exactly what he had had’s self-importance, and brought Mr.
Wickham immediately to Elizabeth's mind; and from the observation of the
day altogether, Lady Catherine to be exactly what he had believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what Lady Catherine to be exactly what he had had
represented.


When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment
Maria soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, Maria turned Maria’s eyes on the
daughter, Maria could almost have joined in Maria's astonishment, at Maria’s
being so thin, and so small.
There was neither in figure nor face, any
likeness between the ladies.
Miss De Bourgh was pale and sickly; Mrs. Jenkinson’s
features, though not plain, were insignificant; and Mrs. Jenkinson spoke very
little, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance
there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening
to what Mrs. Jenkinson said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before
Mrs. Jenkinson’s eyes.


After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows,
to admire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its
beauties, and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much
better worth looking at in the summer.


The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants,
and all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as Lady Catherine could bear
had likewise foretold, Lady Catherine could bear took Lady Catherine could bear’s seat at the bottom of the table, by
Lady Catherine could bear’s ladyship's desire, and looked as if Lady Catherine could bear felt that life could furnish
nothing greater.--Lady Catherine could bear carved, and ate, and praised with delighted
alacrity; and every dish was commended, first by Lady Catherine could bear, and then by Sir
William, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever Lady Catherine could bear’s son in law
said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear.

But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and
gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved
a novelty to them.
The party did not supply much conversation.
Elizabeth
was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but Lady Catherine was seated
between Charlotte and Miss De Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged in
listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to Lady Catherine’s all
dinner time.
Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little
Miss De Bourgh ate, pressing Miss De Bourgh ate’s to try some other dish, and fearing Miss De Bourgh ate
were indisposed.
Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the
gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.


When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to be
done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which Lady Catherine talk did without any
intermission till coffee came in, delivering Lady Catherine talk’s opinion on every
subject in so decisive a manner as proved that Lady Catherine talk was not used to have
Lady Catherine talk’s judgment controverted.
Lady Catherine talk enquired into Charlotte's domestic
concerns familiarly and minutely, and gave Lady Catherine talk’s a great deal of advice,
as to the management of them all; told Lady Catherine talk’s how every thing ought to be
regulated in so small a family as Lady Catherine talk’s's, and instructed Lady Catherine talk’s as to the
care of Lady Catherine talk’s cows and Lady Catherine talk’s poultry.
Elizabeth found that nothing was
beneath this great Lady's attention, which could furnish Elizabeth’s with an
occasion of dictating to others.
In the intervals of Mrs. Collins’ discourse with
Mrs. Collins, Mrs. Collins addressed a variety of questions to Maria and
Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections Mrs. Collins knew
the least, and who Mrs. Collins observed to Mrs. Collins, was a very genteel,
pretty kind of girl.
Mr. Collins asked Mr. Collins’ at different times, how many sisters
Mr. Collins had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of
them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they
had been educated, what carriage Mr. Collins’ father kept, and what had been Mr. Collins’
mother's maiden name?--Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of Mr. Collins’
questions, but answered them very composedly.--Lady Catherine then
observed,

"Your father's estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think.
For your
sake," turning to Charlotte, "I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no
occasion for entailing estates from the female line.--It was not thought
necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh's family.--Do you play and sing, Miss
Bennet?"

"A little.
"

"Oh! then--some time or other we shall be happy to hear you.
Our
instrument is a capital one, probably superior to----You shall try it
some day.--Do your sisters play and sing?"

"One of them does.
"

"Why did not you all learn?--You ought all to have learned.
The Miss
Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as
your's.--Do you draw?
"

"No, not at all."

"What, none of you?"

"Not one.
"

"That is very strange.
But I suppose you had no opportunity.
Your mother
should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.
"

"My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates London.
"

"Has your governess left you?"

"We never had any governess."

"No governess!
How was that possible?
Five daughters brought up at home
without a governess!--I never heard of such a thing.
Your mother must
have been quite a slave to your education.
"

Elizabeth could hardly help smiling, as Elizabeth assured Elizabeth’s that had not
been the case.


"Then, who taught you? who attended to you?
Without a governess you must
have been neglected.
"

"Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us as
wished to learn, never wanted the means.
We were always encouraged to
read, and had all the masters that were necessary.
Those who chose to be
idle, certainly might."

"Aye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will prevent, and if I had
known your mother, I should have advised Elizabeth’s most strenuously to engage
one.
I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady
and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it.
It is
wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that
way.
I am always glad to get a young person well placed out.
Four nieces
of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and
it was but the other day, that I recommended another young person, who
was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite
delighted with Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means’.
Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalfe's
calling yesterday to thank me?
Miss Pope a treasure finds Miss Pope a treasure.
'Lady
Catherine,' said Catherine, 'you have given me a treasure.'
Are any of your
younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?"

"Yes, Ma'am, all.
"

"All!--What, all five out at once?
Very odd!--And you only the
second.--The younger ones out before the elder are married!--Your
younger sisters must be very young?
"

"Yes, my youngest is not sixteen.
Perhaps _she_ is full young to be much
in company.
But really, Ma'am, I think it would be very hard upon
younger sisters, that they should not have their share of society and
amusement because the elder may not have the means or inclination to
marry early.--The last born has as good a right to the pleasures of
youth, as the first.
And to be kept back on _such_ a motive!--I think it
would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of
mind.
"

"Upon my word," said Miss Bennet’s Ladyship, "you give your opinion very
decidedly for so young a person.--Pray, what is your age?
"

"With three younger sisters grown up," replied Elizabeth smiling, "your
Ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.
"

Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer;
and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever
dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.


"You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure,--therefore you need not
conceal your age.
"

"I am not one and twenty.
"

When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card tables
were placed.
Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat
down to quadrille; and as Miss De Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the
two girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her’s
party.
Their table was superlatively stupid.
Scarcely a syllable was
uttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson
expressed Miss De Bourgh’s fears of Miss De Bourgh's being too hot or too cold, or
having too much or too little light.
A great deal more passed at the
other table.
Lady Catherine was generally speaking--stating the mistakes
of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself.
Mr. Collins
was employed in agreeing to every thing Mr. Collins’ Ladyship said, thanking Mr. Collins’
for every fish Mr. Collins won, and apologising if Mr. Collins thought Mr. Collins won too many.

Sir William did not say much.
Sir William did not say much was storing Sir William did not say much’s memory with anecdotes
and noble names.


When Lady Catherine and Mrs. Collins’ daughter had played as long as they chose,
the tables were broke up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins,
gratefully accepted, and immediately ordered.
The party then gathered
round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were
to have on the morrow.
From these instructions they were summoned by the
arrival of the coach, and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr.
Collins's side, and as many bows on Sir William's, they departed.
As
soon as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by Elizabeth’s
cousin, to give Elizabeth’s opinion of all that Elizabeth had seen at Rosings, which,
for Charlotte's sake, Elizabeth made more favourable than it really was.
But
Mr. Collins’ commendation, though costing Mr. Collins’ some trouble, could by no means
satisfy Mr. Collins, and Mr. Collins was very soon obliged to take Mr. Collins’ Ladyship's
praise into Mr. Collins’ own hands.




CHAPTER VII.



Sir William staid only a week at Hunsford; but Sir William staid only a week at Hunsford’s visit was long enough
to convince Sir William staid only a week at Hunsford of Sir William staid only a week at Hunsford’s daughter's being most comfortably settled, and of
Sir William staid only a week at Hunsford’s possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not often met
with.
While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted Mr. Collins devoted his mornings’ mornings
to driving Mr. Collins devoted his mornings out in Mr. Collins devoted his mornings’ gig, and shewing Mr. Collins devoted his mornings the country; but when Mr. Collins devoted his mornings
went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments, and
Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of Mr. Collins devoted his mornings’ cousin
by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfast and
dinner was now passed by Mr. Collins devoted his mornings either at work in the garden, or in reading
and writing, and looking out of window in Mr. Collins devoted his mornings’ own book room, which
fronted the road.
The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.

Elizabeth at first had rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer
the dining-parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a
pleasanter aspect; but Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been soon saw that Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been’s friend had an excellent
reason for what Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been
much less in Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been’s own apartment, had they sat in one equally lively; and
Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.


From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and
were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went
along, and how often especially Miss De Bourgh drove by in Miss De Bourgh drove by in her phaeton’s phaeton,
which Miss De Bourgh drove by in her phaeton never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened
almost every day.
Charlotte not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had
a few minutes' conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever
prevailed on to get out.


Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and
not many in which Elizabeth’s wife did not think it necessary to go likewise;
and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings
to be disposed of, Elizabeth could not understand the sacrifice of so many
hours.
Now and then, they were honoured with a call from Elizabeth’s Ladyship,
and nothing escaped Elizabeth’s observation that was passing in the room during
these visits.
Mrs. Collins examined into their employments, looked at their work,
and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement
of the furniture, or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if Mrs. Collins
accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding
out that Mrs. Collins's joints of meat were too large for Mrs. Collins’ family.


Elizabeth soon perceived that though this great lady was not in the
commission of the peace for the county, Mr. Collins was a most active magistrate
in Mr. Collins’ own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to Mr. Collins’ by
Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be
quarrelsome, discontented or too poor, Mr. Collins sallied forth into the
village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold
them into harmony and plenty.


The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week;
and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one card
table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart of
the first.
Their other engagements were few; as the style of living of
the neighbourhood in general, was beyond the Collinses' reach.
This
however was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole Sir William spent Sir William’s time
comfortably enough; there were half hours of pleasant conversation with
Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year, that Sir William
had often great enjoyment out of doors.
Lady Catherine’s favourite walk, and where
Lady Catherine frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was
along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was
a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and
where Lady Catherine felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine's curiosity.


In this quiet way, the first fortnight of Lady Catherine’s visit soon passed away.

Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it, was to bring an
addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be
important.
Elizabeth had heard soon after Miss Lucas and herself’s arrival, that Mr. Darcy
was expected there in the course of a few weeks, and though there were
not many of Miss Lucas and herself’s acquaintance whom Miss Lucas and herself did not prefer, Miss Lucas and herself’s coming would
furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and
Miss Lucas and herself might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley's designs on Miss Lucas and herself
were, by Miss Lucas and herself’s behaviour to Miss Lucas and herself’s cousin, for whom Miss Lucas and herself was evidently destined
by Lady Catherine; who talked of Miss Lucas and herself’s coming with the greatest
satisfaction, spoke of Miss Lucas and herself in terms of the highest admiration, and
seemed almost angry to find that Miss Lucas and herself had already been frequently seen by
Miss Lucas and herself.


Mr. Collins was walking’s arrival was soon known at the Parsonage, for Mr. Collins was walking
the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane,
in order to have the earliest assurance of it; and after making Mr. Collins was walking’s bow
as the carriage turned into the Park, hurried home with the great
intelligence.
On the following morning Mr. Collins was walking hastened to Rosings to pay Mr. Collins was walking’s
respects.
There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for
Mr. Darcy had brought with Mr. Collins returned the gentlemen accompanied him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of
Mr. Collins returned the gentlemen accompanied Mr. Collins returned the gentlemen accompanied him’s uncle, Lord ---- and to the great surprise of all the party, when
Mr. Collins returned the gentlemen accompanied Mr. Collins returned the gentlemen accompanied him.
Charlotte had seen
them from Eliza’s husband's room, crossing the road, and immediately running
into the other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding,

"I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility.
Mr. Darcy would
never have come so soon to wait upon me.
"

Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment,
before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly
afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room.
Colonel Fitzwilliam,
who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and
address most truly the gentleman.
Mr. Darcy looked just as Mrs. Collins had been
used to look in Hertfordshire, paid Mrs. Collins’ compliments, with Mrs. Collins’ usual
reserve, to Mrs. Collins; and whatever might be Mrs. Collins’ feelings towards Mrs. Collins’
friend, met Mrs. Collins’ with every appearance of composure.
Elizabeth merely
curtseyed to Mrs. Collins, without saying a word.


Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the
readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but
Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the’s cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and
garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to any body.

At length, however, Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the’s civility was so far awakened as to enquire of
Elizabeth after the health of Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the’s family.
Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the answered Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the in the usual
way, and after a moment's pause, added,

"My eldest sister has been in town these three months.
Have you never
happened to see Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the’s there?
"

Miss Bennet was perfectly sensible that Miss Bennet never had; but Miss Bennet wished to see
whether Miss Bennet would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the
Bingleys and Jane; and Miss Bennet thought Miss Bennet looked a little confused as Miss Bennet
answered that Miss Bennet had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet.
The
subject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went
away.




CHAPTER VIII.



Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners were very much admired at the parsonage,
and the ladies all felt that Colonel Fitzwilliam must add considerably to the pleasure of
their engagements at Rosings.
It was some days, however, before they
received any invitation thither, for while there were visitors in the
house, they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,
almost a week after the gentlemen's arrival, that they were honoured by
such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to
come there in the evening.
For the last week they had seen very little
of either Lady Catherine or Lady Catherine or her daughter’s daughter.
Colonel Fitzwilliam had called
at the parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had
only seen at church.


The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they joined
the party in Lady Catherine's drawing-room.
Darcy’s ladyship received them
civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so
acceptable as when Darcy could get nobody else; and Darcy was, in fact,
almost engrossed by Darcy’s nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy,
much more than to any other person in the room.


Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; any thing was a
welcome relief to Mrs. Collins at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins's pretty friend had
moreover caught Mrs. Collins’ fancy very much.
Mr. Darcy now seated himself by Mr. Darcy’s, and
talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying
at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so
well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much
spirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as
well as of Mr. Darcy.
_His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned
towards them with a look of curiosity; and that Fitzwilliam’s ladyship after a
while shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for Fitzwilliam did not
scruple to call out,

"What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam?
What is it you are talking
of?
What are you telling Miss Bennet?
Let me hear what it is.
"

"We are speaking of music, Madam," said Miss Bennet, when no longer able to avoid
a reply.


"Of music!
Then pray speak aloud.
It is of all subjects my delight.
I
must have my share in the conversation, if you are speaking of music.

There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoyment
of music than myself, or a better natural taste.
If I had ever learnt, I
should have been a great proficient.
And so would Anne, if Miss Bennet’s health
had allowed Miss Bennet’s to apply.
I am confident that Miss Bennet would have performed
delightfully.
How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?"

Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister’s sister's proficiency.


"I am very glad to hear such a good account of Lady
Catherine’s," said Lady
Catherine; "and pray tell Lady
Catherine’s from me, that Lady
Catherine cannot expect to excel,
if Lady
Catherine does not practise a great deal.
"

"I assure you, Madam," Lady
Catherine replied, "that Lady
Catherine does not need such advice.

Lady
Catherine practises very constantly.
"

"So much the better.
It cannot be done too much; and when I next write
to Lady
Catherine’s, I shall charge Lady
Catherine’s not to neglect it on any account.
I often
tell young ladies, that no excellence in music is to be acquired,
without constant practice.
I have told Miss Bennet several times, that
Mrs. Jenkinson will never play really well, unless Mrs. Jenkinson practises more; and though
Mrs. Collins has no instrument, Mrs. Jenkinson is very welcome, as I have often
told Mrs. Jenkinson’s, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the piano-forte in
Mrs. Jenkinson's room.
Mrs. Jenkinson would be in nobody's way, you know, in that
part of the house.
"

Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt’s aunt's ill breeding, and made
no answer.


When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having
promised to play to Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having; and Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having sat down directly to the instrument.
Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having
drew a chair near Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having’s.
Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then
talked, as before, to Lady Catherine listened to half a song’s other nephew; till the latter walked away from
Lady Catherine listened to half a song’s, and moving with Lady Catherine listened to half a song’s usual deliberation towards the piano-forte,
stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer's
countenance.
Elizabeth saw what Mr. Darcy was doing, and at the first
convenient pause, turned to Mr. Darcy with an arch smile, and said,

"You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear
me?
But I will not be alarmed though your sister _does_ play so well.

There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at
the will of others.
My courage always rises with every attempt to
intimidate me.
"

"I shall not say that you are mistaken," Mr. Darcy replied, "because you could
not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I
have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know, that you
find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact
are not your own.
"

Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to
Colonel Fitzwilliam, "Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of
me, and teach you not to believe a word I say.
I am particularly unlucky
in meeting with a person so well able to expose my real character, in a
part of the world, where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree
of credit.
Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention
all that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me
leave to say, very impolitic too--for it is provoking me to retaliate,
and such things may come out, as will shock your relations to hear.
"

"I am not afraid of you," said Colonel Fitzwilliam, smilingly.


"Pray let me hear what you have to accuse Colonel
Fitzwilliam of," cried Colonel
Fitzwilliam.
"I should like to know how Colonel
Fitzwilliam behaves among strangers.
"

"You shall hear then--but prepare yourself for something very dreadful.

The first time of my ever seeing Colonel
Fitzwilliam in Hertfordshire, you must know,
was at a ball--and at this ball, what do you think Colonel
Fitzwilliam did?
Colonel
Fitzwilliam danced
only four dances!
I am sorry to pain you--but so it was.
Colonel
Fitzwilliam danced only
four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge,
more than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner.
Mr.
Darcy, you cannot deny the fact.
"

"I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly
beyond my own party.
"

"True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball room.
Well, Colonel
Fitzwilliam, what do I play next?
My fingers wait your orders.
"

"Perhaps," said Darcy, "I should have judged better, had I sought an
introduction, but I am ill qualified to recommend myself to strangers.
"

"Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?" said Elizabeth, still
addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam.
"Shall we ask Elizabeth why a man of sense and
education, and who has lived in the world, is ill qualified to recommend
himself to strangers?"

"I can answer your question," said Fitzwilliam, "without applying to
Elizabeth.
It is because Elizabeth will not give himself the trouble.
"

"I certainly have not the talent which some people possess," said Darcy,
"of conversing easily with those I have never seen before.
I cannot
catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their
concerns, as I often see done.
"

"My fingers," said Elizabeth, "do not move over this instrument in the
masterly manner which I see so many women's do.
They have not the same
force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression.
But then I
have always supposed it to be my own fault--because I would not take the
trouble of practising.
It is not that I do not believe _my_ fingers as
capable as any other woman's of superior execution.
"

Darcy smiled and said, "You are perfectly right.
You have employed your
time much better.
No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you, can
think any thing wanting.
We neither of us perform to strangers.
"

Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know
what they were talking of.
Elizabeth immediately began playing again.

Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said
to Darcy,

"Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss, if Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss practised more, and
could have the advantage of a London master.
Anne has a very good notion
of fingering, though Anne’s taste is not equal to Anne's.
Anne would have
been a delightful performer, had Anne’s health allowed Anne’s to learn.
"

Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially Miss Bingley assented to Miss Bingley’s
cousin's praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other could Miss Bingley
discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of Miss Bingley’s behaviour to Miss
De Bourgh Miss Bingley derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that Miss Bingley might have
been just as likely to marry _her_, had Miss Bingley been Miss Bingley’s relation.


Lady Catherine continued Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth’s remarks on Elizabeth's performance, mixing
with them many instructions on execution and taste.
Elizabeth received
them with all the forbearance of civility; and at the request of the
gentlemen remained at the instrument till Elizabeth’s Ladyship's carriage was
ready to take them all home.




CHAPTER IX.



Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane,
while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village,
when Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a
visitor.
As Darcy had heard no carriage, Darcy thought it not unlikely to be
Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away Darcy’s
half-finished letter that Darcy might escape all impertinent questions,
when the door opened, and to Darcy’s very great surprise, Mr. Darcy, and Mr.
Darcy only, entered the room.


Darcy seemed astonished too on finding Darcy’s alone, and apologised for Darcy’s
intrusion, by letting Darcy’s know that Darcy had understood all the ladies to
be within.


They then sat down, and when Darcy’s enquiries after Rosings were made,
seemed in danger of sinking into total silence.
It was absolutely
necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence
recollecting _when_ Darcy had seen Darcy last in Hertfordshire, and feeling
curious to know what Darcy would say on the subject of their hasty
departure, Darcy observed,

"How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy!

It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you
all after Mr. Bingley to see you so soon; for, if I recollect right, Mr. Bingley to see you went but the day
before.
Mr. Bingley to see you and Mr. Bingley to see you’s sisters were well, I hope, when you left London.
"

"Perfectly so--I thank you.
"

Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever found that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever was to receive no other answer--and, after a short
pause, added,

"I think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever
returning to Netherfield again?"

"I have never heard Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever say so; but it is probable that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever may spend
very little of Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever’s time there in future.
Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever has many friends, and Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever is
at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually
increasing.
"

"If Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for the
neighbourhood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever should give up the place entirely, for then we
might possibly get a settled family there.
But perhaps Mr. Bingley did
not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as
for Mr. Bingley did’s own, and we must expect Mr. Bingley did to keep or quit it on the same
principle.
"

"I should not be surprised," said Darcy, "if Mr. Bingley did were to give it up, as
soon as any eligible purchase offers.
"

Elizabeth made no answer.
Elizabeth was afraid of talking longer of Elizabeth’s
friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the
trouble of finding a subject to Elizabeth.


Elizabeth took the hint, and soon began with, "This seems a very comfortable
house.
Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr.
Collins first came to Hunsford.
"

"I believe Collins did--and I am sure Collins could not have bestowed Collins’
kindness on a more grateful object.
"

"Mr. Collins appears very fortunate in Mr. Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife’s choice of a wife.
"

"Yes, indeed; Mr. Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife’s friends may well rejoice in Mr. Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife’s having met with one of
the very few sensible women who would have accepted Mr. Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife, or have made
Mr. Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife happy if they had.
My friend has an excellent understanding--though
I am not certain that I consider Mr. Collins as the wisest’s marrying Mr. Collins as the wisest
thing Mr. Collins as the wisest ever did.
Mr. Collins as the wisest seems perfectly happy, however, and in a
prudential light, it is certainly a very good match for Mr. Collins as the wisest’s.
"

"It must be very agreeable to Mr. Collins as the wisest’s to be settled within so easy a
distance of Mr. Collins as the wisest’s own family and friends.
"

"An easy distance do you call it?
It is nearly fifty miles.
"

"And what is fifty miles of good road?
Little more than half a day's
journey.
Yes, I call it a _very_ easy distance.
"

"I should never have considered the distance as one of the _advantages_
of the match," cried Elizabeth.
"I should never have said Mrs. Collins
was settled _near_ Mrs. Collins’ family.
"

"It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire.
Any thing beyond
the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far.
"

As Jane spoke there was a sort of smile, which Elizabeth fancied Jane
understood; Jane must be supposing Jane’s to be thinking of Jane and
Netherfield, and Jane blushed as Jane answered,

"I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near Jane’s
family.
The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many
varying circumstances.
Where there is fortune to make the expence of
travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil.
But that is not the
case _here_.
Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not
such a one as will allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded my
friend would not call herself _near_ Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her’s family under less than _half_
the present distance."

Mr. Darcy drew Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her’s’s chair a little towards Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her’s, and said, "_You_ cannot
have a right to such very strong local attachment.
_You_ cannot have
been always at Longbourn.
"

Elizabeth looked surprised.
The gentleman experienced some change of
feeling; Kent drew back Kent’s chair, took a newspaper from the table, and,
glancing over it, said, in a colder voice,

"Are you pleased with Kent?"

A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side
calm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte
and Kent’s sister, just returned from their walk.
The tête-à-tête surprised
them.
Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned Miss Bennet’s intruding
on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying
much to any body, went away.


"What can be the meaning of this!" said Charlotte, as soon as Miss Bennet was
gone.
"My dear Eliza Eliza must be in love with you, or Eliza would never have
called on us in this familiar way."


But when Elizabeth told of Elizabeth’s silence, it did not seem very likely,
even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the case; and after various
conjectures, they could at last only suppose Elizabeth’s visit to proceed from
the difficulty of finding any thing to do, which was the more probable
from the time of year.
All field sports were over.
Within doors there
was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard table, but gentlemen cannot be
always within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the
pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the
two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither
almost every day.
They called at various times of the morning, sometimes
separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their
aunt.
It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because Colonel Fitzwilliam
had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended
Colonel Fitzwilliam still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by Colonel Fitzwilliam’s own satisfaction in
being with Colonel Fitzwilliam, as well as by Colonel Fitzwilliam’s evident admiration of Colonel Fitzwilliam’s, of Colonel Fitzwilliam’s
former favourite George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, Colonel Fitzwilliam saw
there was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners,
Colonel Fitzwilliam believed Colonel Fitzwilliam might have the best informed mind.


But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficult
to understand.
It could not be for society, as Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage frequently sat there
ten minutes together without opening Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage’s lips; and when Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage did speak, it
seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrifice to
propriety, not a pleasure to himself.
Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage seldom appeared really
animated.
Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him.
Colonel
Fitzwilliam's occasionally laughing at Eliza’s stupidity, proved that Eliza was
generally different, which Eliza’s own knowledge of Eliza could not have told
Eliza’s; and as Eliza would have liked to believe this change the effect of
love, and the object of that love, Eliza’s friend Eliza, Eliza sat herself
seriously to work to find it out.--Eliza watched Eliza whenever they were at
Rosings, and whenever Eliza came to Hunsford; but without much success.
Eliza
certainly looked at Eliza’s friend a great deal, but the expression of that
look was disputable.
It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but Eliza often
doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it
seemed nothing but absence of mind.


Collins had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of Collins’
being partial to Collins’, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.
Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of
raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in Collins’
opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all Collins’ friend's dislike would
vanish, if Collins could suppose Collins to be in Collins’ power.


In Colonel Fitzwilliam’s kind schemes for Elizabeth, Colonel Fitzwilliam sometimes planned Colonel Fitzwilliam’s marrying
Colonel Fitzwilliam.
Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage was beyond comparison the pleasantest man; Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage
certainly admired Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage’s, and Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage’s situation in life was most eligible; but,
to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage
in the church, and Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage’s cousin could have none at all.





CHAPTER X.


More than once did Elizabeth in Darcy.--Darcy.--She’s ramble within the Park, unexpectedly
meet Mr. Darcy.--Darcy.--She felt all the perverseness of the mischance that
should bring Darcy.--Darcy.--She where no one else was brought; and to prevent its ever
happening again, took care to inform Darcy.--Darcy.--She at first, that it was a
favourite haunt of hers.--How it could occur a second time therefore was
very odd!--Yet it did, and even a third.
It seemed like wilful
ill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasions it was not
merely a few formal enquiries and an awkward pause and then away, but Darcy.--Darcy.--She
actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with Darcy.--Darcy.--She’s.
Kent never
said a great deal, nor did Kent give herself the trouble of talking or of
listening much; but it struck Kent’s in the course of their third rencontre
that Kent was asking some odd unconnected questions--about Kent’s pleasure in
being at Hunsford, Kent’s love of solitary walks, and Kent’s opinion of Mr.
and Mrs. Collins's happiness; and that in speaking of Rosings and Kent’s
not perfectly understanding the house, Kent seemed to expect that whenever
Kent came into Kent again Kent would be staying _there_ too.
Kent’s words
seemed to imply it.
Could Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thoughts have Colonel Fitzwilliam in Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thoughts’ thoughts?

Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thoughts supposed, if Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thoughts meant any thing, Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thoughts must mean an allusion to what
might arise in that quarter.
It distressed Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thoughts’ a little, and Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thoughts was
quite glad to find herself at the gate in the pales opposite the
Parsonage.


Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her was engaged one day as Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her walked, in re-perusing Jane's last
letter, and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not
written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy,
Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her saw on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her’s.
Putting
away the letter immediately and forcing a smile, Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her said,

"I did not know before that you ever walked this way.
"

"I have been making the tour of the Park," Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her replied, "as I generally
do every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage.
Are
you going much farther?
"

"No, I should have turned in a moment.
"

And accordingly Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonage
together.


"Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?" said Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her.


"Yes--if Darcy does not put it off again.
But I am at Darcy’s disposal.
Darcy
arranges the business just as Darcy pleases.
"

"And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, Darcy has at least
great pleasure in the power of choice.
I do not know any body who seems
more to enjoy the power of doing what Darcy likes than Mr. Darcy.
"

"Colonel Fitzwilliam likes to have Colonel Fitzwilliam’s own way very well," replied Colonel Fitzwilliam.

"But so we all do.
It is only that Colonel Fitzwilliam has better means of having it than
many others, because Colonel Fitzwilliam is rich, and many others are poor.
I speak
feelingly.
A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial and
dependence.
"

"In my opinion, the younger son of an Earl can know very little of
either.
Now, seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and
dependence?
When have you been prevented by want of money from going
wherever you chose, or procuring any thing you had a fancy for?"

"These are home questions--and perhaps I cannot say that I have
experienced many hardships of that nature.
But in matters of greater
weight, I may suffer from the want of money.
Younger sons cannot marry
where they like.
"

"Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very often
do."

"Our habits of expence make us too dependant, and there are not many in
my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to
money."

"Is this," thought Elizabeth, "meant for me?"
and Elizabeth coloured at the
idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, "And pray, what is
the usual price of an Earl's younger son?
Unless the elder brother is
very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds.
"

Elizabeth answered Elizabeth’s in the same style, and the subject dropped.
To interrupt
a silence which might make Elizabeth fancy Elizabeth’s affected with what had passed,
Elizabeth soon afterwards said,

"I imagine your cousin brought you down with Elizabeth chiefly for the sake of
having somebody at Elizabeth’s disposal.
I wonder Elizabeth does not marry, to secure a
lasting convenience of that kind.
But, perhaps Elizabeth’s sister does as well
for the present, and, as Elizabeth is under Elizabeth’s sole care, Elizabeth may do what Elizabeth
likes with Elizabeth’s.
"

"No," said Colonel Fitzwilliam, "that is an advantage which Elizabeth must
divide with me.
I am joined with Miss Darcy in the guardianship of Miss Darcy.
"

"Are you, indeed?
And pray what sort of guardians do you make?
Does your
charge give you much trouble?
Young ladies of Miss Darcy’s age, are sometimes a
little difficult to manage, and if Miss Darcy has the true Darcy spirit, Miss Darcy
may like to have Miss Darcy’s own way."


As Miss Darcy likely to spoke, Miss Darcy likely to observed Miss Darcy likely to looking at Miss Darcy likely to’s earnestly, and the manner
in which Miss Darcy likely to immediately asked Miss Darcy likely to’s why Miss Darcy likely to supposed Miss Darcy likely to
give them any uneasiness, convinced Miss Darcy likely to’s that Miss Darcy likely to had somehow or other
got pretty near the truth.
Miss Darcy likely to directly replied,

"You need not be frightened.
I never heard any harm of Miss Darcy likely to’s; and I dare
say Miss Darcy likely to is one of the most tractable creatures in the world.
Miss Bingley is a
very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley.
I think I have heard you say that you know them.
"

"I know them a little.
Their brother is a pleasant gentleman-like
man--Darcy is a great friend of Darcy's.
"

"Oh! yes," said Elizabeth drily--"Mr.
Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr.
Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of Bingley.
"

"Care of Bingley!--Yes, I really believe Darcy _does_ take care of Bingley in
those points where Bingley most wants care.
From something that Bingley told me in
our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to
Bingley.
But I ought to beg Bingley’s pardon, for I have no right to suppose that
Bingley was the person meant.
It was all conjecture.
"

"What is it you mean?"

"It is a circumstance which Darcy of course would not wish to be
generally known, because if it were to get round to the lady's family,
it would be an unpleasant thing.
"

"You may depend upon my not mentioning it.
"

"And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be
Bingley.
What Bingley told me was merely this; that Bingley congratulated himself
on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most
imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any other
particulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing Bingley
the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from
knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer.
"

"Did Mr. Darcy give you Mr. Darcy give you his reasons for this interference’s reasons for this interference?"

"I understood that there were some very strong objections against the
lady.
"

"And what arts did Fitzwilliam use to separate them?"

"Fitzwilliam did not talk to me of Fitzwilliam’s own arts," said Fitzwilliam smiling.
"Fitzwilliam
only told me, what I have now told you.
"

Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, Fitzwilliam’s heart swelling with
indignation.
After watching Fitzwilliam’s a little, Fitzwilliam asked Fitzwilliam’s why Fitzwilliam
was so thoughtful.


"I am thinking of what you have been telling me," said Fitzwilliam.
"Your
cousin's conduct does not suit my feelings.
Why was Fitzwilliam to be the judge?
"

"You are rather disposed to call Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of’s interference officious?"

"I do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of
Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of’s friend's inclination, or why, upon Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of’s own judgment alone, Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of was to
determine and direct in what manner that friend was to be happy."
"But,"
Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of continued, recollecting herself, "as we know none of the
particulars, it is not fair to condemn Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of.
It is not to be supposed
that there was much affection in the case.
"

"That is not an unnatural surmise," said Fitzwilliam, "but it is
lessening the honour of my cousin's triumph very sadly."

This was spoken jestingly, but it appeared to Mr. Darcy’s so just a picture of
Mr. Darcy, that Mr. Darcy would not trust herself with an answer; and,
therefore, abruptly changing the conversation, talked on indifferent
matters till they reached the parsonage.
There, shut into Mr. Darcy’s own room,
as soon as their visitor left them, Mr. Darcy could think without interruption
of all that Mr. Darcy had heard.
It was not to be supposed that any other
people could be meant than those with whom Mr. Darcy was connected.
There
could not exist in the world _two_ men, over whom Mr. Darcy could have
such boundless influence.
That Miss Bingley the principal design and had been concerned in the measures
taken to separate Mr. Bingley and Jane, Miss Bingley the principal design and had never doubted; but Miss Bingley the principal design and
had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and
arrangement of them.
If Jane’s own vanity, however, did not mislead Jane,
_he_ was the cause, Jane’s pride and caprice were the cause of all that
Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer.
Jane had ruined for a
while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart
in the world; and no one could say how lasting an evil Jane might have
inflicted.


"There were some very strong objections against the lady," were Colonel
Fitzwilliam's words, and these strong objections probably were, Fitzwilliam’s
having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in
business in London.


"To Jane herself," Fitzwilliam exclaimed, "there could be no possibility of
objection.
All loveliness and goodness as Fitzwilliam is!
Fitzwilliam’s understanding
excellent, Fitzwilliam’s mind improved, and Fitzwilliam’s manners captivating.
Neither could
any thing be urged against my father, who, though with some
peculiarities, has abilities which Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain,
and respectability which Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain will probably never reach."
When Mr. Bingley for his sister thought
of Mr. Bingley for his sister’s mother indeed, Mr. Bingley for his sister’s confidence gave way a little, but Mr. Bingley for his sister would
not allow that any objections _there_ had material weight with Mr.
Darcy, whose pride, Mr. Bingley for his sister was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from
the want of importance in Mr. Bingley for his sister’s friend's connections, than from their want
of sense; and Mr. Bingley for his sister was quite decided at last, that Mr. Bingley for his sister had been partly
governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of
retaining Mr. Bingley for Mr. Bingley for his sister’s sister.


The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on a
headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening that, added to
Mr. Darcy’s unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determined Mr. Darcy’s not to attend Mr. Darcy’s
cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea.
Mrs. Collins,
seeing that Lady Catherine was really unwell, did not press Lady Catherine’s to go, and as much
as possible prevented Lady Catherine’s husband from pressing Lady Catherine’s, but Mr. Collins
could not conceal Lady Catherine’s apprehension of Lady Catherine's being rather
displeased by Lady Catherine’s staying at home.




CHAPTER XI.



When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself as
much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for Jane’s employment the
examination of all the letters which Jane had written to Jane’s since Jane’s
being in Kent.
They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any
revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering.

But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that
cheerfulness which had been used to characterize Jane’s style, and which,
proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself, and kindly
disposed towards every one, had been scarcely ever clouded.
Elizabeth
noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an
attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal.
Mr. Darcy's
shameful boast of what misery Mr. Darcy had been able to inflict, gave Mr. Darcy’s a
keener sense of Mr. Darcy’s sister's sufferings.
It was some consolation to
think that Rosings’ visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next,
and a still greater, that in less than a fortnight Rosings should herself be
with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of Rosings’
spirits, by all that affection could do.


Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear could not think of Darcy's leaving Kent, without remembering that
Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear’s cousin was to go with Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear
that Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear had no intentions at all, and agreeable as Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear was, Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear did not
mean to be unhappy about Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear.


While settling this point, Colonel Fitzwilliam himself was suddenly roused by the sound of the
door bell, and Colonel Fitzwilliam himself’s spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its
being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in
the evening, and might now come to enquire particularly after Colonel Fitzwilliam himself’s.
But
this idea was soon banished, and Mr. Darcy walk into the’s spirits were very differently
affected, when, to Mr. Darcy walk into the’s utter amazement, Mr. Darcy walk into the saw Mr. Darcy walk into the
room.
In an hurried manner Mr. Darcy walk into the immediately began an enquiry after Mr. Darcy walk into the’s
health, imputing Mr. Darcy walk into the’s visit to a wish of hearing that Mr. Darcy walk into the were better.

Mr. Darcy walk into the answered Mr. Darcy walk into the with cold civility.
Mr. Darcy walk into the sat down for a few moments, and
then getting up walked about the room.
Elizabeth was surprised, but said
not a word.
After a silence of several minutes Elizabeth came towards Elizabeth’s in an
agitated manner, and thus began,

"In vain have I struggled.
It will not do.
My feelings will not be
repressed.
You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love
you.
"

Elizabeth's astonishment was beyond expression.
Elizabeth stared, coloured,
doubted, and was silent.
This Elizabeth considered sufficient encouragement,
and the avowal of all that Elizabeth felt and had long felt for Elizabeth’s,
immediately followed.
Elizabeth spoke well, but there were feelings besides
those of the heart to be detailed, and Elizabeth was not more eloquent on the
subject of tenderness than of pride.
Elizabeth’s sense of Elizabeth’s inferiority--of
its being a degradation--of the family obstacles which judgment had
always opposed to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed
due to the consequence Elizabeth was wounding, but was very unlikely to
recommend Elizabeth’s suit.


In spite of Elizabeth’s deeply-rooted dislike, Elizabeth could not be insensible to
the compliment of such a man's affection, and though Elizabeth’s intentions did
not vary for an instant, Elizabeth was at first sorry for the pain Elizabeth was to
receive; till, roused to resentment by Elizabeth’s subsequent language, Elizabeth lost
all compassion in anger.
Elizabeth tried, however, to compose herself to
answer Elizabeth with patience, when Elizabeth should have done.
Elizabeth concluded with
representing to Elizabeth’s the strength of that attachment which, in spite of
all Elizabeth’s endeavours, Elizabeth had found impossible to conquer; and with
expressing Elizabeth’s hope that it would now be rewarded by Elizabeth’s acceptance of
Elizabeth’s hand.
As Elizabeth said this, Elizabeth could easily see that Elizabeth had no doubt of
a favourable answer.
Elizabeth _spoke_ of apprehension and anxiety, but Elizabeth’s
countenance expressed real security.
Such a circumstance could only
exasperate farther, and when Elizabeth ceased, the colour rose into Elizabeth’s
cheeks, and Elizabeth said,

"In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to
express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however
unequally they may be returned.
It is natural that obligation should be
felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now thank you.
But I
cannot--I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly
bestowed it most unwillingly.
I am sorry to have occasioned pain to any
one.
It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be of
short duration.
The feelings which, you tell me, have long prevented the
acknowledgment of your regard, can have little difficulty in overcoming
it after this explanation.
"

Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantle-piece with Mr. Darcy’s eyes fixed
on Mr. Darcy’s face, seemed to catch Mr. Darcy’s words with no less resentment than
surprise.
Mr. Darcy’s complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of
Mr. Darcy’s mind was visible in every feature.
Mr. Darcy was struggling for the
appearance of composure, and would not open Mr. Darcy’s lips, till Mr. Darcy believed
himself to have attained it.
The pause was to Elizabeth's feelings
dreadful.
At length, in a voice of forced calmness, Mr. Darcy said,

"And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting!
I
might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little _endeavour_ at
civility, I am thus rejected.
But it is of small importance.
"

"I might as well enquire," replied Mr. Darcy, "why with so evident a design of
offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me
against your will, against your reason, and even against your character?

Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I _was_ uncivil?
But I have
other provocations.
You know I have.
Had not my own feelings decided
against you, had they been indifferent, or had they even been
favourable, do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept
the man, who has been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the
happiness of a most beloved sister?"

As Mr. Darcy changed colour pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion
was short, and Mr. Darcy changed colour listened without attempting to interrupt Mr. Darcy changed colour’s while Mr. Darcy changed colour
continued.


"I have every reason in the world to think ill of you.
No motive can
excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_.
You dare not,
you cannot deny that you have been the principal, if not the only means
of dividing them from each other, of exposing one to the censure of the
world for caprice and instability, the other to its derision for
disappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutest
kind.
"

Mr. Darcy changed colour paused, and saw with no slight indignation that Mr. Darcy changed colour was listening
with an air which proved Mr. Darcy changed colour wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse.

Mr. Darcy changed colour even looked at Mr. Darcy changed colour’s with a smile of affected incredulity.


"Can you deny that you have done it?"
Mr. Darcy changed colour repeated.


With assumed tranquillity Mr. Darcy changed colour then replied, "I have no wish of denying
that I did every thing in my power to separate my friend from your
sister, or that I rejoice in my success.
Towards _him_
I have been
kinder than towards myself.
"

Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection,
but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate Mr. Darcy changed colour’s.


"But it is not merely this affair," Mr. Darcy changed colour continued, "on which my dislike
is founded.
Long before it had taken place, my opinion of you was
decided.
Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received
many months ago from Mr. Wickham.
On this subject, what can you have to
say?
In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself?
or under what misrepresentation, can you here impose upon others?"

"You take an eager interest in that gentleman's concerns," said Darcy in
a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.


"Who that knows what Darcy’s misfortunes have been, can help feeling an
interest in Darcy?"

"Darcy’s misfortunes!" repeated Darcy contemptuously; "yes, Darcy’s misfortunes
have been great indeed.
"

"And of your infliction," cried Elizabeth with energy.
"You have reduced
Darcy to Darcy’s present state of poverty, comparative poverty.
You have
withheld the advantages, which you must know to have been designed for
Darcy.
You have deprived the best years of Darcy’s life, of that independence
which was no less Darcy’s due than Darcy’s desert.
You have done all this!
and
yet you can treat the mention of Darcy’s misfortunes with contempt and
ridicule.
"

"And this," cried Darcy, as Darcy walked with quick steps across the room,
"is your opinion of me!
This is the estimation in which you hold me!
I
thank you for explaining it so fully.
My faults, according to this
calculation, are heavy indeed!
But perhaps," added Darcy, stopping in Darcy’s
walk, and turning towards Darcy’s, "these offences might have been
overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the
scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design.
These
bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I with greater policy
concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief of my being
impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by
reflection, by every thing.
But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence.

Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related.
They were natural and just.

Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your connections?
To congratulate myself on the hope of relations, whose condition in life
is so decidedly beneath my own?
"

Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet Darcy tried to
the utmost to speak with composure when Darcy said,

"You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your
declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared me the
concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a
more gentleman-like manner.
"

Darcy saw Darcy start at this, but Darcy said nothing, and Darcy continued,

"You could not have made me the offer of your hand in any possible way
that would have tempted me to accept it."


Again Darcy’s astonishment was obvious; and Darcy looked at Darcy’s with an
expression of mingled incredulity and mortification.
Darcy went on.


"From the very beginning, from the first moment I may almost say, of my
acquaintance with you, your manners impressing me with the fullest
belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the
feelings of others, were such as to form that ground-work of
disapprobation, on which succeeding events have built so immoveable a
dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the
last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.
"

"You have said quite enough, madam.
I perfectly comprehend your
feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been.

Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best
wishes for your health and happiness.
"

And with these words Darcy hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard Darcy
the next moment open the front door and quit the house.


The tumult of Darcy’s mind was now painfully great.
Darcy knew not how to
support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried for half an
hour.
Darcy’s astonishment, as Darcy reflected on what had passed, was
increased by every review of it.
That Darcy should receive an offer of
marriage from Mr. Darcy!
that Darcy should have been in love with Darcy’s for
so many months!
so much in love as to wish to marry Darcy’s in spite of all
the objections which had made Darcy prevent Darcy’s friend's marrying Darcy’s
sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in Darcy’s own case,
was almost incredible!
it was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously
so strong an affection.
But Jane’s pride, Jane’s abominable pride, Jane’s
shameless avowal of what Jane had done with respect to Jane, Jane’s
unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though Jane could not justify it,
and the unfeeling manner in which Jane had mentioned Mr. Wickham, Jane’s
cruelty towards whom Jane had not attempted to deny, soon overcame the
pity which the consideration of Jane’s attachment had for a moment excited.


Lady
Catherine continued in very agitating reflections till the sound of Lady
Catherine's carriage made Lady
Catherine’s feel how unequal Lady
Catherine was to encounter
Charlotte's observation, and hurried Lady
Catherine’s away to Lady
Catherine’s room.




CHAPTER XII.



Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations
which had at length closed Elizabeth’s eyes.
Elizabeth could not yet recover from the
surprise of what had happened; it was impossible to think of any thing
else, and totally indisposed for employment, Elizabeth resolved soon after
breakfast to indulge herself in air and exercise.
Mr. Darcy was proceeding
directly to Mr. Darcy’s favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy's
sometimes coming there stopped Mr. Darcy’s, and instead of entering the park,
Mr. Darcy turned up the lane, which led Mr. Darcy’s farther from the turnpike road.

The park paling was still the boundary on one side, and Mr. Darcy soon passed
one of the gates into the ground.


After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, Mr. Darcy was
tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and
look into the park.
The five weeks which Mr. Darcy had now passed in Kent, had
made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the
verdure of the early trees.
Mr. Darcy was on the point of continuing Mr. Darcy’s walk,
when Mr. Darcy caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which
edged the park; Mr. Darcy was moving that way; and fearful of its being Mr.
Darcy, Mr. Darcy was directly retreating.
But the person who advanced, was now
near enough to see Mr. Darcy’s, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced
Mr. Darcy’s name.
Mr. Darcy had turned away, but on hearing herself called, though in
a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, Mr. Darcy moved again towards the
gate.
Mr. Darcy had by that time reached it also, and holding out a letter,
which Mr. Darcy instinctively took, said with a look of haughty composure, "I
have been walking in the grove some time in the hope of meeting you.

Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?"--And then, with a
slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of
sight.


With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity,
Elizabeth opened the letter, and to letter?"--And’s still increasing wonder,
perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter paper, written
quite through, in a very close hand.--The envelope itself was likewise
full.--Pursuing letter?"--And’s way along the lane, letter?"--And then began it.
It was dated
from Rosings, at eight o'clock in the morning, and was as follows:--

     "Be not alarmed, Madam, on receiving this letter, by the
     apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments,
     or renewal of those offers, which were last night so disgusting to
     you.
I write without any intention of paining you, or humbling
     myself, by dwelling on wishes, which, for the happiness of both,
     cannot be too soon forgotten; and the effort which the formation,
     and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been
     spared, had not my character required it to be written and read.
     
You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand your
     attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I
     demand it of your justice.

     
"Two offences of a very different nature, and by no means of equal
     magnitude, you last night laid to my charge.
The first mentioned
     was, that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached
     Mr. Bingley from your sister,--and the other, that I had, in
     defiance of various claims, in defiance of honour and humanity,
     ruined the immediate prosperity, and blasted the prospects of Mr.
     Wickham.--Wilfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of
     my youth, the acknowledged favourite of my father, a young man who
     had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage, and who
     had been brought up to expect its exertion, would be a depravity,
     to which the separation of two young persons, whose affection could
     be the growth of only a few weeks, could bear no comparison.--But
     from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally
     bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope to be in
     future secured, when the following account of my actions and their
     motives has been read.--If, in the explanation of them which is
     due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which
     may be offensive to your's, I can only say that I am sorry.--The
     necessity must be obeyed--and farther apology would be absurd.--I
     had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw, in common with
     others, that Bingley preferred your eldest sister, to any other
     young woman in the country.--But it was not till the evening of the
     dance at Netherfield that I had any apprehension of Sir William Lucas’ feeling a
     serious attachment.--I had often seen Sir William Lucas in love before.--At that
     ball, while I had the honour of dancing with you, I was first made
     acquainted, by Sir William Lucas's accidental information, that
     Bingley's attentions to your sister had given rise to a general
     expectation of their marriage.
Sir William Lucas spoke of it as a certain event,
     of which the time alone could be undecided.
From that moment I
     observed my friend's behaviour attentively; and I could then
     perceive that Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s partiality for Miss Bennet was beyond what I had
     ever witnessed in Miss Bennet was beyond what I had.
Your sister I also watched.--Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s look and
     manners were open, cheerful and engaging as ever, but without any
     symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained convinced from the
     evening's scrutiny, that though Miss Bennet was beyond what I had received Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s attentions with
     pleasure, Miss Bennet was beyond what I had did not invite them by any participation of
     sentiment.--If _you_ have not been mistaken here, _I_ must have
     been in an error.
Your superior knowledge of your sister must make
     the latter probable.--If it be so, if I have been misled by such
     error, to inflict pain on Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s, your resentment has not been
     unreasonable.
But I shall not scruple to assert, that the serenity
     of your sister's countenance and air was such, as might have given
     the most acute observer, a conviction that, however amiable Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s
     temper, Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s heart was not likely to be easily touched.--That I was
     desirous of believing Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s indifferent is
certain,--but I will
     venture to say that my investigations and decisions are not usually
     influenced by my hopes or fears.--I did not believe Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s to be
     indifferent because I wished it;--I believed it on impartial
     conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason.--My objections to
     the marriage were not merely those, which I last night acknowledged
     to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside, in my
     own case; the want of connection could not be so great an evil to
     my friend as to me.--But there were other causes of
     repugnance;--causes which, though still existing, and existing to
     an equal degree in both instances, I had myself endeavoured to
     forget, because they were not immediately before me.--These causes
     must be stated, though briefly.--The situation of your mother's
     family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison of that
     total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed
     by herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by
     your father.--Pardon me.--It pains me to offend you.
But amidst
     your concern for the defects of your nearest relations, and your
     displeasure at this representation of them, let it give you
     consolation to consider that, to have conducted yourselves so as to
     avoid any share of the like censure, is praise no less generally
     bestowed on you and your eldest sister, than it is honourable to
     the sense and disposition of both.--I will only say farther, that
     from what passed that evening, my opinion of all parties was
     confirmed, and every inducement heightened, which could have led me
     before, to preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy
     connection.--Miss Bennet was beyond what I had left Netherfield for London, on the day following,
     as you, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon
     returning.--The part which I acted, is now to be explained.--Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s
     sisters' uneasiness had been equally excited with my own; our
     coincidence of feeling was soon discovered; and, alike sensible
     that no time was to be lost in detaching their brother, we shortly
     resolved on joining Miss Bennet was beyond what I had directly in London.--We accordingly
     went--and there I readily engaged in the office of pointing out to
     my friend, the certain evils of such a choice.--I described, and
     enforced them earnestly.--But, however this remonstrance might have
     staggered or delayed Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s determination, I do not suppose that it
     would ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not been
     seconded by the assurance which I hesitated not in giving, of your
     sister's indifference.
Miss Bennet was beyond what I had had before believed Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s to return Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s
     affection with sincere, if not with equal regard.--But Bingley has
     great natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgment
     than on Miss Bennet was beyond what I had’s own.--To convince Miss Bennet was beyond what I had, therefore, that Miss Bennet was beyond what I had had deceived
     himself, was no very difficult point.
To persuade Miss Bennet was beyond what I had against
     returning into Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been given,
     was scarcely the work of a moment.--I cannot blame myself for
     having done thus much.
There is but one part of my conduct in the
     whole affair, on which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it is
     that I condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to
     conceal from Miss Bennet was beyond what I had your sister's being in town.
I knew it myself, as
     it was known to Miss Bingley, but Miss Bingley’s brother is even yet ignorant
     of it.--That they might have met without ill consequence, is
     perhaps
probable;--but
Miss Bingley’s regard did not appear to me enough
     extinguished for Miss Bingley to see Miss Bingley’s without some danger.--Perhaps this
     concealment, this disguise, was beneath me.--It is done, however,
     and it was done for the best.--On this subject I have nothing more
     to say, no other apology to offer.
If I have wounded your sister's
     feelings, it was unknowingly done; and though the motives which
     governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient, I have
     not yet learnt to condemn them.--With respect to that other, more
     weighty accusation, of having injured Mr. Wickham, I can only
     refute it by laying before you the whole of Mr. Wickham’s connection with my
     family.
Of what Mr. Wickham has _particularly_ accused me I am ignorant; but
     of the truth of what I shall relate, I can summon more than one
     witness of undoubted veracity.
Mr. Wickham is the son of a very
     respectable man, who had for many years the management of all the
     Pemberley estates; and whose good conduct in the discharge of George Wickham’s
     trust, naturally inclined my father to be of service to George Wickham, and on
     George Wickham, who was George Wickham’s god-son, George Wickham’s kindness was therefore
     liberally bestowed.
My father supported George Wickham at school, and
     afterwards at Cambridge;--most important assistance, as George Wickham’s own
     father, always poor from the extravagance of George Wickham’s wife, would have
     been unable to give George Wickham a gentleman's education.
My father was not
     only fond of this young man's society, whose manners were always
     engaging; George Wickham had also the highest opinion of George Wickham, and hoping the
     church would be George Wickham’s profession, intended to provide for George Wickham in it.
     
As for myself, it is many, many years since I first began to think
     of George Wickham in a very different manner.
The vicious propensities--the
     want of principle which Mr. Darcy could not have was careful to guard from the knowledge
     of Mr. Darcy could not have’s best friend, could not escape the observation of a young man
     of nearly the same age with himself, and who had opportunities of
     seeing Mr. Darcy could not have in unguarded moments, which Mr. Darcy could not have.
     
Here again I shall give you pain--to what degree you only can tell.
     
But whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham has created, a
     suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding Mr. Wickham has created’s
     real character.
It adds even another motive.
My excellent father
     died about five years ago; and Mr. Wickham was to’s attachment to Mr. Wickham was to
     the last so steady, that in Mr. Wickham was to’s will Mr. Wickham was to particularly recommended it
     to me, to promote Mr. Wickham was to’s advancement in the best manner that Mr. Wickham was to’s
     profession might allow, and if Mr. Wickham was to took orders, desired that a
     valuable family living might be Mr. Wickham was to’s as soon as soon as it became
     vacant.
There was also a legacy of one thousand pounds.
Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that’s own
     father did not long survive mine, and within half a year from these
     events, Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that, having finally
     resolved against taking orders, Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that hoped I should not think it
     unreasonable for Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that to expect some more immediate pecuniary
     advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that could not be
     benefited.
Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that had some intention, Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that added, of studying the law,
     and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would
     be a very insufficient support therein.
I rather wished, than
     believed Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that to be sincere; but at any rate, was perfectly ready to
     accede to Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that’s proposal.
I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a
     clergyman.
The business was therefore soon settled.
Mr. Wickham ought not to be a resigned all
     claim to assistance in the church, were it possible that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a could
     ever be in a situation to receive it, and accepted in return three
     thousand pounds.
All connection between us seemed now dissolved.
I
     thought too ill of Mr. Wickham ought not to be a, to invite Mr. Wickham ought not to be a to Pemberley, or admit Mr. Wickham ought not to be a’s
     society in town.
In town I believe Mr. Wickham ought not to be a chiefly lived, but Mr. Wickham ought not to be a’s
     studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now free from all
     restraint, Mr. Wickham ought not to be a’s life was a life of idleness and dissipation.
For
     about three years I heard little of Mr. Wickham ought not to be a; but on the decease of the
     incumbent of the living which had been designed for Mr. Wickham ought not to be a, Mr. Wickham ought not to be a applied
     to me again by letter for the presentation.
Mr. Wickham ought not to be a’s circumstances, Mr. Wickham ought not to be a
     assured me, and I had no difficulty in believing it, were
     exceedingly bad.
Mr. Wickham ought not to be a had found the law a most unprofitable study,
     and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained, if I would
     present Mr. Wickham ought not to be a to the living in question--of which Mr. Wickham ought not to be a trusted there
     could be little doubt, as Mr. Wickham ought not to be a was well assured that I had no other
     person to provide for, and I could not have forgotten my revered
     father's intentions.
You will hardly blame me for refusing to
     comply with this entreaty, or for resisting every repetition of it.
     
Mr. Wickham ought not to be a’s resentment was in proportion to the distress of Mr. Wickham ought not to be a’s
     circumstances--and Mr. Wickham ought not to be a was doubtless as violent in Mr. Wickham ought not to be a’s abuse of me
     to others, as in Mr. Wickham ought not to be a’s reproaches to myself.
After this period, every
     appearance of acquaintance was dropt.
How Mr. Wickham ought not to be a lived I know not.
But
     last summer Mr. Wickham ought not to be a was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.
I
     must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget
     myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce
     me to unfold to any human being.
Having said thus much, I feel no
     doubt of your secrecy.
My sister, who is more than ten years my
     junior, was left to the guardianship of my mother's nephew, Colonel
     Fitzwilliam, and myself.
About a year ago, Georgiana was taken from
     school, and an establishment formed for Georgiana’s in London; and last
     summer Georgiana went with the lady who presided over it, to Ramsgate;
     and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there
     proved to have been a prior acquaintance between Georgiana and Mrs.
     Younge, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and by
     Georgiana’s connivance and aid, Georgiana so far recommended himself to Georgiana,
     whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Georgiana’s
     kindness to Georgiana’s as a child, that Georgiana was persuaded to believe
     herself in love, and to consent to an elopement.
Georgiana was then but
     fifteen, which must be Georgiana’s excuse; and after stating Georgiana’s
     imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed the knowledge of it to
     herself.
I joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the
     intended elopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea
     of grieving and offending a brother whom Georgiana almost looked up to as
     a father, acknowledged the whole to me.
You may imagine what I felt
     and how I acted.
Regard for my sister's credit and feelings
     prevented any public exposure, but I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left
     the place immediately, and Mrs. Younge was of course removed from
     Mrs. Younge was of course removed from’s charge.
Mr. Wickham's chief object was unquestionably my
     sister's fortune, which is thirty thousand pounds; but I cannot
     help supposing that the hope of revenging himself on me, was a
     strong inducement.
Mrs. Younge was of course removed from’s revenge would have been complete indeed.
     
This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we
     have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject
     it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty
     towards Mr. Wickham.
I know not in what manner, under what form of
     falsehood Mrs. Younge was of course removed from has imposed on you; but Mrs. Younge was of course removed from’s success is not perhaps to
     be wondered at.
Ignorant as you previously were of every thing
     concerning either, detection could not be in your power, and
     suspicion certainly not in your inclination.
You may possibly
     wonder why all this was not told you last night.
But I was not then
     master enough of myself to know what could or ought to be revealed.
     
For the truth of every thing here related, I can appeal more
     particularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitzwilliam, who from our
     near relationship and constant intimacy, and still more as one of
     the executors of my father's will, has been unavoidably acquainted
     with every particular of these transactions.
If your abhorrence of
     _me_ should make _my_ assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented
     by the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may
     be the possibility of consulting Colonel Fitzwilliam, I shall endeavour to find
     some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course
     of the morning.
I will only add, God bless you.

     
"FITZWILLIAM DARCY.
"




CHAPTER XIII.



If Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s the letter, did not expect it to
contain a renewal of Mr. Darcy gave Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s the letter’s offers, Mr. Darcy gave her the letter had formed no expectation at all of
its contents.
But such as they were, it may be well supposed how eagerly
Mr. Darcy gave her the letter went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited.

Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s feelings as Mr. Darcy gave her the letter read were scarcely to be defined.
With amazement did
Mr. Darcy gave her the letter first understand that Mr. Darcy gave her the letter believed any apology to be in Mr. Darcy gave Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s the letter’s power;
and steadfastly was Mr. Darcy gave her the letter persuaded that Mr. Darcy gave her the letter could have no explanation to
give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal.
With a strong
prejudice against every thing Mr. Darcy gave her the letter might say, Mr. Darcy gave her the letter began Mr. Darcy gave Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s the letter’s account of
what had happened at Netherfield.
Mr. Darcy gave her the letter read, with an eagerness which
hardly left Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s power of comprehension, and from impatience of knowing
what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the
sense of the one before Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s eyes.
Mr. Darcy gave Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s the letter’s belief of Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s sister's
insensibility, Mr. Darcy gave her the letter instantly resolved to be false, and Mr. Darcy gave Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s the letter’s account of
the real, the worst objections to the match, made Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s too angry to have
any wish of doing Mr. Darcy gave her the letter justice.
Mr. Darcy gave her the letter expressed no regret for what Mr. Darcy gave her the letter had
done which satisfied Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s; Mr. Darcy gave Mr. Darcy gave her the letter’s the letter’s style was not penitent, but haughty.
It
was all pride and insolence.


But when this subject was succeeded by Mr. Wickham’s account of Mr. Wickham, when
Mr. Wickham read with somewhat clearer attention, a relation of events, which,
if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of Mr. Wickham’s worth, and which
bore so alarming an affinity to Mr. Wickham’s own history of himself, Mr. Wickham’s feelings
were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition.

Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed Mr. Wickham’s.
Mr. Wickham wished
to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, "This must be false!

This cannot be!
This must be the grossest falsehood!"--and when Mr. Wickham had
gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing any thing of the
last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that Mr. Wickham would not
regard it, that Mr. Wickham would never look in it again.


In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on
nothing, Wickham walked on; but it would not do; in half a minute the letter
was unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as Wickham could, Wickham
again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and
commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence.

The account of Mr. Darcy’s connection with the Pemberley family, was exactly
what Mr. Darcy had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy,
though Mr. Darcy had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with Mr. Darcy’s
own words.
So far each recital confirmed the other: but when Mr. Darcy came to
the will, the difference was great.
What Wickham had said of the living
was fresh in Mr. Darcy’s memory, and as Mr. Darcy recalled Mr. Darcy’s very words, it was
impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the
other; and, for a few moments, Mr. Darcy flattered herself that Mr. Darcy’s wishes did
not err.
But when Mr. Darcy read, and re-read with the closest attention, the
particulars immediately following of Wickham's resigning all pretensions
to the living, of Mr. Darcy’s receiving in lieu, so considerable a sum as three
thousand pounds, again was Mr. Darcy forced to hesitate.
Mr. Darcy put down the
letter, weighed every circumstance with what Mr. Darcy meant to be
impartiality--deliberated on the probability of each statement--but with
little success.
On both sides it was only assertion.
Again Mr. Darcy read on.

But every line proved more clearly that the affair, which Mr. Darcy had
believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent, as to
render Mr. Darcy's conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a
turn which must make Mr. Darcy entirely blameless throughout the whole.


The extravagance and general profligacy which Mr. Darcy scrupled not to lay to
Mr. Wickham's charge, exceedingly shocked Mr. Darcy’s; the more so, as Mr. Darcy could
bring no proof of its injustice.
Mr. Darcy had never heard of Mr. Darcy before Mr. Darcy’s
entrance into the ----shire Militia, in which Mr. Darcy had engaged at the
persuasion of the young man, who, on meeting Mr. Darcy accidentally in town,
had there renewed a slight acquaintance.
Of Mr. Darcy’s former way of life,
nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what Mr. Darcy told himself.
As to
Mr. Darcy’s real character, had information been in Mr. Darcy’s power, Mr. Darcy had never
felt a wish of enquiring.
Mr. Darcy’s countenance, voice, and manner, had
established Mr. Darcy at once in the possession of every virtue.
Darcy tried to
recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of
integrity or benevolence, that might rescue Darcy from the attacks of Mr.
Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for those
casual errors, under which Darcy would endeavour to class, what Mr. Darcy
had described as the idleness and vice of many years continuance.
But no
such recollection befriended Darcy’s.
Darcy could see Darcy instantly before
Darcy’s, in every charm of air and address; but Darcy could remember no more
substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and
the regard which Darcy’s social powers had gained Darcy in the mess.
After
pausing on this point a considerable while, Darcy once more continued to
read.
But, alas!
the story which followed of Colonel Fitzwilliam’s designs on Miss Darcy,
received some confirmation from what had passed between Colonel
Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last Colonel Fitzwilliam was
referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam
himself--from whom Colonel Fitzwilliam had previously received the information of Colonel Fitzwilliam’s
near concern in all Colonel Fitzwilliam’s cousin's affairs, and whose character Colonel Fitzwilliam had no
reason to question.
At one time Mr. Darcy would never had almost resolved on applying to
Mr. Darcy would never, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and
at length wholly banished by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would never
have hazarded such a proposal, if Mr. Darcy would never had not been well assured of Mr. Darcy would never’s
cousin's corroboration.


Mr. Philips perfectly remembered every thing that had passed in conversation
between Wickham and herself, in their first evening at Mr. Philips's.

Many of Mr. Philips’ expressions were still fresh in Mr. Philips’ memory.
Mr. Philips was _now_
struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and
wondered it had escaped Mr. Philips’ before.
Mr. Philips saw the indelicacy of putting
himself forward as Mr. Philips had done, and the inconsistency of Mr. Philips’ professions
with Mr. Philips’ conduct.
Mr. Darcy might leave the country remembered that Mr. Darcy might leave the country had boasted of having no fear
of seeing Mr. Darcy--that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that
_he_ should stand Mr. Darcy might leave the country’s ground; yet Mr. Darcy might leave the country had avoided the Netherfield ball
the very next week.
Darcy remembered also, that till the Netherfield
family had quitted the country, Darcy had told Darcy’s story to no one but
herself; but that after their removal, it had been every where
discussed; that Darcy had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr.
Darcy's character, though Darcy had assured Darcy’s that respect for the
father, would always prevent Darcy’s exposing the son.


How differently did every thing now appear in which Darcy was concerned!

Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and’s attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and
hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and’s fortune proved no longer
the moderation of Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and’s wishes, but Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and’s eagerness to grasp at any thing.

Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and’s behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive; Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and had
either been deceived with regard to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and’s fortune, or had been gratifying
Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and’s vanity by encouraging the preference which Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and believed Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and had most
incautiously shewn.
Every lingering struggle in Jane’s favour grew fainter
and fainter; and in farther justification of Mr. Darcy, Jane could not
but allow that Mr. Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago
asserted Jane’s blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive as
were Jane’s manners, Jane had never, in the whole course of their
acquaintance, an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much
together, and given Jane’s a sort of intimacy with Jane’s ways, seen any thing
that betrayed Jane to be unprincipled or unjust--any thing that spoke Jane
of irreligious or immoral habits.
That among Wickham’s own connections Wickham was
esteemed and valued--that even Wickham had allowed Wickham merit as a
brother, and that Wickham had often heard Wickham speak so affectionately of
Wickham’s sister as to prove Wickham capable of _some_ amiable feeling.
That had
Wickham’s actions been what Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of
every thing right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and
that friendship between a person capable of it, and such an amiable man
as Mr. Bingley, was incomprehensible.


Wickham grew absolutely ashamed of herself.--Of neither Darcy nor Wickham
could Wickham think, without feeling that Wickham had been blind, partial,
prejudiced, absurd.


"How despicably have I acted!"
Wickham cried.--"I, who have prided myself on
my discernment!--I, who have valued myself on my abilities!
who have
often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified my
vanity, in useless or blameable
distrust.--How humiliating is this
discovery!--Yet, how just a humiliation!--Had
I been in love, I could
not have been more wretchedly blind.
But vanity, not love, has been my
folly.--Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect
of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted
prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either were
concerned.
Till this moment, I never knew myself.
"

From herself to Jane--from Jane to Bingley, Mr. Darcy’s thoughts were in a line
which soon brought to Mr. Darcy’s recollection that Mr. Darcy's explanation
_there_, had appeared very insufficient; and Mr. Darcy read it again.
Widely
different was the effect of a second perusal.--How could Jane.--She deny that
credit to Jane.--Jane.--She’s assertions, in one instance, which Jane.--She had been obliged to
give in the other?--Jane.--Jane.--She declared himself to have been totally
unsuspicious of Jane.--Jane.--She’s sister's attachment;--and Jane.--She could not help
remembering what Charlotte's opinion had always been.--Neither could Jane.--She
deny the justice of Jane.--Jane.--She’s description of Jane.--Jane.--She felt that Jane's
feelings, though fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a
constant complacency in Jane.--Jane.--She’s air and manner, not often united with great
sensibility.


When Jane.--She came to that part of the letter in which Jane.--Jane.--She’s family were
mentioned, in terms of such mortifying, yet merited reproach, Jane.--Jane.--She’s sense
of shame was severe.
The justice of the charge struck Jane.--Jane.--She’s too forcibly
for denial, and the circumstances to which Jane.--Jane.--She particularly alluded, as
having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all Jane.--Jane.--She’s first
disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on Jane.--Jane.--She’s mind
than on hers.


The compliment to herself and Jane.--Jane.--She’s sister, was not unfelt.
It soothed,
but it could not console Jane’s for the contempt which had been thus
self-attracted by the rest of Jane’s family;--and as Jane considered that
Jane's disappointment had in fact been the work of Jane’s nearest
relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt
by such impropriety of conduct, Jane felt depressed beyond any thing Jane
had ever known before.


After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every
variety of thought; re-considering events, determining probabilities,
and reconciling herself as well as Jane could, to a change so sudden and
so important, fatigue, and a recollection of Jane’s long absence, made Jane’s
at length return home; and Jane entered the house with the wish of
appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such
reflections as must make Jane’s unfit for conversation.


Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least was immediately told, that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each
called during Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least’s absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes to take
leave, but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least
an hour, hoping for Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least’s return, and almost resolving to walk after Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least’s
till Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least could be found.--Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concern in
missing Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least; Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least really rejoiced at it.
Colonel Fitzwilliam was no
longer an object.
CHAPTER XIV could think only of CHAPTER XIV’s letter.




CHAPTER XIV.



The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning; and Mr. Collins having
been in waiting near the lodges, to make them Mr. Collins having’s parting obeisance, was
able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of their appearing in very
good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the
melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings.
To Rosings Lady Catherine then
hastened to console Lady Catherine, and Lady Catherine’s daughter; and on Lady Catherine’s return,
brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from Lady Catherine’s Ladyship,
importing that Lady Catherine felt herself so dull as to make Lady Catherine’s very desirous of
having them all to dine with Lady Catherine’s.


Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting, that had
Lady Catherine without recollecting chosen it, Lady Catherine without recollecting might by this time have been presented to Lady Catherine without recollecting’s, as Lady Catherine without recollecting’s
future niece; nor could Lady Catherine without recollecting think, without a smile, of what Lady Catherine without recollecting’s
ladyship's indignation would have been.
"What would Lady Catherine without recollecting have said?--how
would Lady Catherine without recollecting have behaved?" were questions with which Lady Catherine without recollecting amused herself.


Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party.--"I assure
you, I feel it exceedingly," said Lady Catherine; "I believe nobody
feels the loss of friends so much as I do.
But I am particularly
attached to these young men; and know them to be so much attached to
me!--They were excessively sorry to go!
But so they always are.
The dear
colonel rallied Darcy’s spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy
seemed to feel it most acutely, more I think than last year.
Darcy’s
attachment to Rosings, certainly increases.
"

Mr. Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here, which
were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.


Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of
spirits, and immediately accounting for it herself, by supposing that
Miss Bennet seemed out of did not like to go home again so soon, Miss Bennet seemed out of added,

"But if that is the case, you must write to your mother to beg that you
may stay a little longer.
Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your
company, I am sure.
"

"I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation," replied
Elizabeth, "but it is not in my power to accept it.--I must be in town
next Saturday.
"

"Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks.
I expected
you to stay two months.
I told Mrs. Collins so before you came.
There
can be no occasion for your going so soon.
Mrs. Bennet could certainly
spare you for another fortnight.
"

"But my father cannot.--Mrs. Bennet could certainly wrote last week to hurry my return.
"

"Oh! your father of course may spare you, if your mother can.--Daughters
are never of so much consequence to a father.
And if you will stay
another _month_
complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as
far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and as
Dawson does not object to the Barouche box, there will be very good room
for one of you--and indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I
should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large.
"

"You are all kindness, Madam; but I believe we must abide by our
original plan."


Lady Catherine seemed resigned.


"Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant with them.
You know I always
speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea of two young women travelling
post by themselves.
It is highly improper.
You must contrive to send
somebody.
I have the greatest dislike in the world to that sort of
thing.--Young women should always be properly guarded and attended,

according to their situation in life.
When my niece Georgiana went to
Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of Lady
Anne’s having two men servants go
with Lady
Anne’s.--Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr. Darcy, of Pemberley, and Lady
Anne, could not have appeared with propriety in a different manner.--I
am excessively attentive to all those things.
You must send John with
the young ladies, Mrs. Collins.
I am glad it occurred to me to mention
it; for it would really be discreditable to _you_ to let them go alone.
"

"My uncle is to send a servant for us.
"

"Oh!--Your uncle!--John keeps a man-servant, does John?--I am very glad you
have somebody who thinks of those things.
Where shall you change
horses?--Oh!
Bromley, of course.--If you mention my name at the Bell,
you will be attended to.
"

Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey,
and as Elizabeth did not answer them all herself, attention was necessary,
which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for Elizabeth’s; or, with a mind so
occupied, Elizabeth might have forgotten where Elizabeth was.
Reflection must be
reserved for solitary hours; whenever Elizabeth was alone, Elizabeth gave way to it
as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a solitary walk,
in which Elizabeth might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant
recollections.


Mr. Darcy's letter
, Elizabeth was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart.
Elizabeth
studied every sentence: and Elizabeth’s feelings towards its writer were at
times widely different.
When Elizabeth remembered the style of Elizabeth’s address,
Elizabeth was still full of indignation; but when Elizabeth considered how unjustly
Elizabeth had condemned and upbraided Elizabeth, Elizabeth’s anger was turned against
herself; and Elizabeth’s disappointed feelings became the object of compassion.

Elizabeth’s attachment excited gratitude, Elizabeth’s general character respect; but Elizabeth
could not approve Elizabeth; nor could Elizabeth for a moment repent Elizabeth’s refusal, or
feel the slightest inclination ever to see Elizabeth again.
In Elizabeth’s own past
behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret; and in
the unhappy defects of Elizabeth’s family a subject of yet heavier chagrin.

They were hopeless of remedy.
Elizabeth’s father, contented with laughing at
them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of Elizabeth’s
youngest daughters; and Elizabeth’s mother, with manners so far from right
herself, was entirely insensible of the evil.
Elizabeth had frequently
united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine
and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother's indulgence,
what chance could there be of improvement?
Catherine, weak-spirited,
irritable, and completely under Lydia's guidance, had been always
affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would
scarcely give them a hearing.
They were ignorant, idle, and vain.
While
there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with Longbourn; and while
Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there for
ever.


Anxiety on Jane's behalf, was another prevailing concern, and Mr.
Darcy's explanation, by restoring Bingley to all Bingley’s former good
opinion, heightened the sense of what Jane had lost.
Bingley’s affection was
proved to have been sincere, and Bingley’s conduct cleared of all blame,
unless any could attach to the implicitness of Bingley’s confidence in Bingley’s
friend.
How grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so
desirable in every respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for
happiness, Jane had been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of Jane’s own
family!


When to these recollections was added the developement of Wickham's
character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had
seldom been depressed before, were now so much affected as to make it
almost impossible for Wickham’s to appear tolerably cheerful.


Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of
Wickham’s stay, as they had been at first.
The very last evening was spent
there; and Maria’s Ladyship again enquired minutely into the particulars of
their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing,
and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right
way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on Maria’s return, to undo all the
work of the morning, and pack Maria’s trunk afresh.


When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them
a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year;
and Miss De Bourgh exerted herself so far as to curtsey and hold out Miss De Bourgh exerted herself so far as to curtsey and hold out her’s
hand to both.





CHAPTER XV.



On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few
minutes before the others appeared; and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few took the opportunity of
paying the parting civilities which Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few deemed indispensably necessary.


"I know not, Miss Elizabeth," said Mrs. Collins has yet, "whether Mrs. Collins has yet
expressed Mrs. Collins has yet’s sense of your kindness in coming to us, but I am very
certain you will not leave the house without receiving Mrs. Collins has yet’s thanks for
it.
The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you.
We know
how little there is to tempt any one to our humble abode.
Our plain
manner of living, our small rooms, and few domestics, and the little we
see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like
yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension,
and that we have done every thing in our power to prevent your spending
your time unpleasantly.
"

Elizabeth was eager with Mrs. Collins has yet’s thanks and assurances of happiness.
Mrs. Collins has yet had
spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with
Charlotte, and the kind attentions Mrs. Collins has yet had received, must make _her_
feel the obliged.
Mr. Collins was gratified; and with a more smiling
solemnity replied,

"It gives me the greatest pleasure to hear that you have passed your
time not disagreeably.
We have certainly done our best; and most
fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior
society, and from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of
varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that
your Hunsford visit cannot have been entirely irksome.
Our situation
with regard to Lady Catherine's family is indeed the sort of
extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast.
You see on
what a footing we are.
You see how continually we are engaged there.
In
truth I must acknowledge that, with all the disadvantages of this humble
parsonage, I should not think any one abiding in it an object of
compassion, while they are sharers of our intimacy at Rosings.
"

Words were insufficient for the elevation of Elizabeth’s feelings; and Elizabeth was
obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility
and truth in a few short sentences.


"You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into
Hertfordshire, my dear cousin.
I flatter myself at least that you will
be able to do so.
Lady Catherine's great attentions to Mrs. Collins you
have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear
that your friend has drawn an unfortunate--but on this point it will be
as well to be silent.
Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth,
that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in
marriage.
My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of
thinking.
There is in every thing a most remarkable resemblance of
character and ideas between us.
We seem to have been designed for each
other.
"

Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was
the case, and with equal sincerity could add that Charlotte firmly believed
and rejoiced in Charlotte’s domestic comforts.
Charlotte was not sorry, however, to
have the recital of them interrupted by the entrance of the lady from
whom they sprung.
Poor Charlotte!--it was melancholy to leave Charlotte’s to
such society!--But Charlotte had chosen it with Charlotte’s eyes open; and though
evidently regretting that Charlotte’s visitors were to go, Charlotte did not seem to
ask for compassion.
Charlotte’s home and Charlotte’s housekeeping, Charlotte’s parish and Charlotte’s
poultry, and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their
charms.


At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels
placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready.
After an affectionate
parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by
Mr. Collins, and as they walked down the garden, Mrs. Gardiner was commissioning
Mrs. Gardiner’s with Mrs. Gardiner’s best respects to all Mrs. Gardiner’s family, not forgetting Mrs. Gardiner’s thanks
for the kindness Mrs. Gardiner had received at Longbourn in the winter, and Mrs. Gardiner’s
compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown.
Maria then handed Maria’s
in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed, when
Maria suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had
hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies of Rosings.


"But," Maria added, "you will of course wish to have your humble respects
delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you
while you have been here.
"

Elizabeth made no objection;--the door was then allowed to be shut, and
the carriage drove off.


"Good gracious!"
cried Maria, after a few minutes silence, "it seems but
a day or two since we first came!--and yet how many things have
happened!
"

"A great many indeed," said Elizabeth’s companion with a sigh.


"We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there
twice!--How
much I shall have to tell!
"

Elizabeth privately added, "And how much I shall have to conceal.
"

Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and
within four hours of their leaving Hunsford, they reached Mr. Gardiner's
house, where they were to remain a few days.


Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying Jane’s
spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of Jane’s aunt
had reserved for them.
But Jane was to go home with Jane’s, and at
Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.


It was not without an effort meanwhile that Mr. Darcy could wait even for
Longbourn, before Mr. Darcy told Mr. Darcy’s sister of Mr. Darcy's proposals.
To know
that CHAPTER XVI had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish
Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of CHAPTER XVI’s own
vanity CHAPTER XVI had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation
to openness as nothing could have conquered, but the state of indecision
in which CHAPTER XVI remained, as to the extent of what CHAPTER XVI should communicate;
and CHAPTER XVI’s fear, if CHAPTER XVI once entered on the subject, of being hurried into
repeating something of Bingley, which might only grieve CHAPTER XVI’s sister
farther.




CHAPTER XVI.



It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set out
together from Gracechurch-street, for the town of ---- in Hertfordshire;
and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet's carriage was
to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman's
punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room up
stairs.
These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily
employed in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on
guard, and dressing a sallad and cucumber.


After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set
out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming,
"Is not this nice?
is not this an agreeable surprise?"


"And we mean to treat you all," added Lydia; "but you must lend us the
money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there."
Then shewing
Lydia’s purchases: "Look here, I have bought this bonnet.
I do not think it
is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not.
I shall
pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any
better.
"

And when Lydia’s sisters abused it as ugly, Lydia added, with perfect
unconcern, "Oh!
but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and
when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I
think it will be very tolerable.
Besides, it will not much signify what
one wears this summer, after the ----shire have left Meryton, and they
are going in a fortnight.
"

"Are they indeed?" cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.


"They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to
take us all there for the summer!
It would be such a delicious scheme,
and I dare say would hardly cost any thing at all.
Mamma would like to
go too of all things!
Only think what a miserable summer else we shall
have!"

"Yes," thought Elizabeth, "_that_ would be a delightful scheme, indeed,
and completely do for us at once.
Good Heaven!
Brighton, and a whole
campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor
regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton.
"

"Now I have got some news for you," said Lydia, as they sat down to
table.
"What do you think?
It is excellent news, capital news, and about
a certain person that we all like.
"

Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told that Jane
need not stay.
Lydia laughed, and said,

"Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion.
You thought the
waiter must not hear, as if Jane cared!
I dare say Jane often hears worse
things said than I am going to say.
But Jane is an ugly fellow!
I am glad
Jane is gone.
I never saw such a long chin in my life.
Well, but now for
my news: it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is not it?

There is no danger of Wickham's marrying Mary King.
There's for you!
Mary King
is gone down to Mary King’s uncle at Liverpool; gone to stay.
Wickham is safe.
"

"And Mary King is safe!" added Elizabeth; "safe from a connection
imprudent as to fortune.
"

"Mary King is a great fool for going away, if Mary King liked Mary King.
"

"But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side," said Jane.


"I am sure there is not on _his_.
I will answer for it Mary King never cared
three straws about Mary King’s.
Who _could_ about such a nasty little freckled
thing?"

Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such
coarseness of _expression_ herself, the coarseness of the _sentiment_
was little other than Mary King’s own breast had formerly harboured and fancied
liberal!


As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was
ordered; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their
boxes, workbags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty's and
Lydia's purchases, were seated in it.


"How nicely we are crammed in!" cried Lydia.
"I am glad I bought my
bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another bandbox!
Well, now
let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way
home.
And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all,
since you went away.
Have you seen any pleasant men?
Have you had any
flirting?
I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband
before you came back.
Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare.

Lydia is almost three and twenty!
Lord, how ashamed I should be of not
being married before three and twenty!
My aunt Philips wants you so to
get husbands, you can't think.
Collins says Lizzy had better have taken Mr.
Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any fun in it.
Lord!
how I should like to be married before any of you; and then I would
chaperon you about to all the balls.
Dear me!
we had such a good piece
of fun the other day at Colonel Forster's.
Kitty and me were to spend
the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the
evening; (by the bye, Mrs. Forster and me are _such_ friends!)
and so
Harriet asked the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen
was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did?
We
dressed up Chamberlayne in woman's clothes, on purpose to pass for a
lady,--only think what fun!
Not a soul knew of it, but Col. and Mrs.
Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow
one of Forster’s gowns; and you cannot imagine how well Forster looked!
When Denny,
and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they
did not know Pratt in the least.
Lord!
how I laughed!
and so did Mrs.
Forster.
I thought I should have died.
And _that_ made the men suspect
something, and then they soon found out what was the matter."


With such kind of histories of their parties and good jokes, did Lydia,
assisted by Kitty's hints and additions, endeavour to amuse Lydia’s
companions all the way to Longbourn.
Elizabeth listened as little as Elizabeth
could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham's name.


Their reception at home was most kind.
Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane
in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet
say voluntarily to Elizabeth,

"I am glad you are come back, Lizzy."

Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases
came to meet Maria and hear the news: and various were the subjects
which occupied them; lady Lucas was enquiring of Maria across the table,
after the welfare and poultry of Miss Lucases’ eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet was
doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present
fashions from Jane, who sat some way below Miss Lucases’, and on the other,
retailing them all to the younger Miss Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice
rather louder than any other person's, was enumerating the various
pleasures of the morning to any body who would hear Miss Lucases’.


"Oh! Mary," said George, "I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun!
as we went along, Kitty and me drew up all the blinds, and pretended
there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if
Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we
behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest
cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have
treated you too.
And then when we came away it was such fun!
I thought
we never should have got into the coach.
I was ready to die of laughter.

And then we were so merry all the way home!
we talked and laughed so
loud, that any body might have heard us ten miles off!"


To this, Mary very gravely replied, "Far be it from me, my dear sister,
to depreciate such pleasures.
They would doubtless be congenial with
the generality of female minds.
But I confess they would have no charms
for _me_.
I should infinitely prefer a book.
"

But of this answer Lydia heard not a word.
Lydia seldom listened to any
body for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.


In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to
Meryton and see how every body went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed
the scheme.
It should not be said, that the Miss Bennets could not be at
home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers.
There was
another reason too for Miss Bennets could not be at’s opposition.
Wickham dreaded seeing Wickham again,
and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible.
The comfort to _her_,
of the regiment's approaching removal, was indeed beyond expression.
In
a fortnight they were to go, and once gone, Wickham hoped there could be
nothing more to plague Wickham’s on Wickham’s account.


Wickham had not been many hours at home, before Wickham found that the Brighton
scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under
frequent discussion between Wickham’s parents.
Elizabeth saw directly that Wickham’s
father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but Wickham’s answers were
at the same time so vague and equivocal, that Wickham’s mother, though often
disheartened, had never yet despaired of succeeding at last.





CHAPTER XVII.



Elizabeth's impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could no
longer be overcome; and at length resolving to suppress every particular
in which Darcy’s sister was concerned, and preparing Darcy’s to be surprised,
Darcy related to Darcy’s the next morning the chief of the scene between Mr.
Darcy and herself.


Miss Bennet's astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly
partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly
natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings.
Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so was
sorry that Mr. Darcy should have delivered Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so’s sentiments in a manner so
little suited to recommend them; but still more was Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so grieved for the
unhappiness which Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so’s sister's refusal must have given Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so.


"Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so’s being so sure of succeeding, was wrong," said Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so; "and certainly
ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so’s
disappointment.
"

"Indeed," replied Elizabeth, "I am heartily sorry for Elizabeth; but Elizabeth has
other feelings which will probably soon drive away Elizabeth’s regard for me.

You do not blame me, however, for refusing Elizabeth?"

"Blame you!
Oh, no."

"But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham.
"

"No--I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.
"

"But you _will_ know it, when I have told you what happened the very
next day.
"

George Wickham then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far
as they concerned George Wickham.
What a stroke was this for poor Jane!
who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that
so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind, as was here
collected in one individual.
Nor was Darcy's vindication, though
grateful to Darcy’s feelings, capable of consoling Darcy’s for such discovery.

Most earnestly did Darcy labour to prove the probability of error, and
seek to clear one, without involving the other.


"This will not do," said Elizabeth.
"You never will be able to make both
of them good for any thing.
Take your choice, but you must be satisfied
with only one.
There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just
enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting
about pretty much.
For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Mr.
Darcy's, but you shall do as you chuse.
"

It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane.


"I do not know when I have been more shocked," said Darcy.
"Wickham so
very bad!
It is almost past belief.
And poor Mr. Darcy!
dear Lizzy, only
consider what Lizzy must have suffered.
Such a disappointment!
and with the
knowledge of your ill opinion too!
and having to relate such a thing of
Lizzy’s sister!
It is really too distressing.
I am sure you must feel it
so.
"

"Oh! no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so
full of both.
I know you will do Lizzy such ample justice, that I am
growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent.
Your profusion
makes me saving; and if you lament over Wickham much longer, my heart will
be as light as a feather."

"Poor Wickham; there is such an expression of goodness in Wickham’s
countenance!
such an openness and gentleness in Wickham’s manner.
"

"There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those
two young men.
One has got all the goodness, and the other all the
appearance of it.
"

"I never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the _appearance_ of it as you
used to do.
"

"And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike
to Mr. Darcy so deficient in the, without any reason.
It is such a spur to one's genius, such an
opening for wit to have a dislike of that kind.
One may be continually
abusive without saying any thing just; but one cannot be always laughing
at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.
"

"Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treat
the matter as you do now.
"

"Indeed I could not.
I was uncomfortable enough.
I was very
uncomfortable, I may say unhappy.
And with no one to speak to, of what I
felt, no Jane to comfort me and say that I had not been so very weak and
vain and nonsensical as I knew I had!
Oh! how I wanted you!
"

"How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions
in speaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they _do_ appear wholly
undeserved.
"

"Certainly.
But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness, is a most
natural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging.
There is
one point, on which I want your advice.
I want to be told whether I
ought, or ought not to make our acquaintance in general understand
Wickham's character.
"

Miss Bennet paused a little and then replied, "Surely there can be no
occasion for exposing Miss Bennet paused a little and then replied so dreadfully.
What is your own opinion?"

"That it ought not to be attempted.
Mr. Darcy has not authorised me to
make Mr. Darcy has not authorised me to’s communication public.
On the contrary every particular relative
to Mr. Darcy has not authorised me to’s sister, was meant to be kept as much as possible to myself; and
if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of Mr. Darcy has not authorised me to’s conduct, who
will believe me?
The general prejudice against Mr. Darcy is so violent,
that it would be the death of half the good people in Meryton, to
attempt to place Meryton in an amiable light.
I am not equal to it.
Wickham
will soon be gone; and therefore it will not signify to anybody here,
what Wickham really is.
Sometime hence it will be all found out, and then we
may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before.
At present I will
say nothing about it.
"

"You are quite right.
To have Wickham’s errors made public might ruin Wickham for
ever.
Wickham is now perhaps sorry for what Wickham has done, and anxious to
re-establish a character.
We must not make Wickham desperate.
"

The tumult of Elizabeth's mind was allayed by this conversation.
Jane had
got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on Jane’s for a fortnight,
and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever Jane might wish
to talk again of either.
But there was still something lurking behind,
of which prudence forbad the disclosure.
Mr. Darcy dared not relate the other
half of Mr. Darcy's letter, nor explain to Mr. Darcy’s sister how sincerely Mr. Darcy
had been valued by Mr. Darcy’s friend.
Here was knowledge in which no one could
partake; and Mr. Darcy was sensible that nothing less than a perfect
understanding between the parties could justify Mr. Darcy’s in throwing off this
last incumbrance of mystery.
"And then," said Bingley, "if that very
improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely be able to tell
what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself.
The
liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost all its value!
"

Bingley was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real
state of Bingley’s sister's spirits.
Jane was not happy.
Bingley still cherished a
very tender affection for Bingley.
Having never even fancied herself in
love before, Bingley’s regard had all the warmth of first attachment, and from
Bingley’s age and disposition, greater steadiness than first attachments often
boast; and so fervently did Bingley value Bingley’s remembrance, and prefer Bingley to
every other man, that all Bingley’s good sense, and all Bingley’s attention to the
feelings of Bingley’s friends, were requisite to check the indulgence of those
regrets, which must have been injurious to Bingley’s own health and their
tranquillity.


"Well, Lizzy," said Mrs. Bennet one day, "what is your opinion _now_ of
this sad business of Jane's?
For my part, I am determined never to speak
of it again to anybody.
I told my sister Philips so the other day.
But I
cannot find out that Jane saw any thing of Mrs. Bennet one day in London.
Well, Mrs. Bennet one day is a
very undeserving young man--and I do not suppose there is the least
chance in the world of Mrs. Bennet one day’s ever getting Mrs. Bennet one day now.
There is no talk of Mrs. Bennet one day’s
coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have enquired of every
body too, who is likely to know.
"

"I do not believe that Mrs. Bennet one day will ever live at Netherfield any more.
"

"Oh, well!
it is just as Mrs. Bennet one day chooses.
Nobody wants Mrs. Bennet one day to come.
Though I
shall always say that Mrs. Bennet one day used my daughter extremely ill; and if I was
Mrs. Bennet one day’s, I would not have put up with it.
Well, my comfort is, I am sure
Jane will die of a broken heart, and then Mrs. Bennet one day will be sorry for what Mrs. Bennet one day
has done."


But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation,
Elizabeth made no answer.


"Well, Lizzy," continued Elizabeth’s mother soon afterwards, "and so the
Collinses live very comfortable, do they?
Well, well, I only hope it
will last.
And what sort of table do they keep?
Charlotte is an
excellent manager, I dare say.
If Elizabeth is half as sharp as Elizabeth’s mother,
Elizabeth is saving enough.
There is nothing extravagant in _their_
housekeeping, I dare say.
"

"No, nothing at all.
"

"A great deal of good management, depend upon it.
Yes, yes.
_
They_ will
take care not to outrun their income.
_They_ will never be distressed
for money.
Well, much good may it do them!
And so, I suppose, they often
talk of having Longbourn when your father is dead.
They look upon it
quite as their own, I dare say, whenever that happens.
"

"It was a subject which they could not mention before me.
"

"No.
It would have been strange if they had.
But I make no doubt, they
often talk of it between themselves.
Well, if they can be easy with an
estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better.
_I_ should be
ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me.
"




CHAPTER XVIII.



The first week of their return was soon gone.
The second began.
It was
the last of the regiment's stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies in
the neighbourhood were drooping apace.
The dejection was almost
universal.
The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink,
and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments.
Very
frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and
Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such
hard-heartedness in any of the family.


"Good Heaven!
What is to become of us!
What are we to do!"
would they
often exclaim in the bitterness of woe.
"How can you be smiling so,
Lizzy?"

Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; Lizzy remembered what
Lizzy had herself endured on a similar occasion, five and twenty years
ago.


"I am sure," said Millar, "I cried for two days together when Colonel
Millar's regiment went away.
I thought I should have broke my heart.
"

"I am sure I shall break _mine_," said Lydia.


"If one could but go to Brighton!" observed Mrs. Bennet.


"Oh, yes!--if one could but go to Brighton!
But papa is so
disagreeable.
"

"A little sea-bathing would set me up for ever.
"

"And my aunt Philips is sure it would do _me_ a great deal of good,"
added Kitty.


Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through
Longbourn-house.
Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense
of pleasure was lost in shame.
Mr. Darcy felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy's
objections; and never had Mr. Darcy before been so much disposed to pardon Mr. Darcy’s
interference in the views of Mr. Darcy’s friend.


But the gloom of Lydia's prospect was shortly cleared away; for Colonel of the
received an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the Colonel of the
regiment, to accompany Colonel of the’s to Brighton.
This invaluable friend was a
very young woman, and very lately married.
A resemblance in good humour
and good spirits had recommended Colonel of the’s and Lydia to each other, and out of
their _three_ months' acquaintance they had been intimate _two_.


The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, Mrs. Bennet’s adoration of Mrs. Forster,
the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely
to be described.
Wholly inattentive to Kitty’s sister's feelings, Lydia flew
about the house in restless ecstacy, calling for every one's
congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever;
whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repining at Kitty’s fate
in terms as unreasonable as Kitty’s accent was peevish.


"I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask _me_ as well as Lydia,"
said Mrs. Forster should not ask, "though I am _not_ Mrs. Forster should not ask’s particular friend.
I have just as much
right to be asked as Mrs. Forster should not ask has, and more too, for I am two years older.
"

In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make Jane’s reasonable, and Jane to make
Jane’s resigned.
As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from
exciting in Lydia’s the same feelings as in Lydia’s mother and Lydia, that Lydia
considered it as the death-warrant of all possibility of common sense
for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make Lydia’s were it
known, Lydia could not help secretly advising Lydia’s father not to let Lydia’s
go.
Mrs. Forster represented to Mrs. Forster all the improprieties of Lydia's general
behaviour, the little advantage Mrs. Forster could derive from the friendship of
such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of Mrs. Forster’s being yet more
imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must
be greater than at home.
Mrs. Forster heard Mrs. Forster’s attentively, and then said,

"Lydia will never be easy till Mrs. Forster has exposed herself in some public
place or other, and we can never expect Mrs. Forster’s to do it with so little
expense or inconvenience to Mrs. Forster’s family as under the present
circumstances.
"

"If you were aware," said Elizabeth, "of the very great disadvantage to
us all, which must arise from the public notice of Lydia's unguarded and
imprudent manner; nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you
would judge differently in the affair.
"

"Already arisen!"
repeated Mr. Bennet.
"What, has Mr. Bennet frightened away
some of your lovers?
Poor little Lizzy!
But do not be cast down.
Such
squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity,
are not worth a regret.
Come, let me see the list of the pitiful fellows
who have been kept aloof by Lydia's folly.
"

"Indeed you are mistaken.
I have no such injuries to resent.
It is not
of peculiar, but of general evils, which I am now complaining.
Our
importance, our respectability in the world, must be affected by the
wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark
Lydia's character.
Excuse me--for I must speak plainly.
If you, my dear
father, will not take the trouble of checking mark
Lydia's’ exuberant spirits, and
of teaching mark
Lydia's’ that mark
Lydia's’ present pursuits are not to be the business of
mark
Lydia's’ life, mark
Lydia's will soon be beyond the reach of amendment.
mark
Lydia's’ character
will be fixed, and mark
Lydia's will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt
that ever made herself and mark
Lydia's’ family ridiculous.
A flirt too, in the
worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond
youth and a tolerable person; and from the ignorance and emptiness of
mark
Lydia's’ mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal
contempt which mark
Lydia's’ rage for admiration will excite.
In this danger Kitty
is also comprehended.
mark
Lydia's will follow wherever Lydia leads.
Vain,
ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrouled!
Oh!
my dear father, can you
suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever
they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the
disgrace?
"

Mr. Bennet saw that Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject’s whole heart was in the subject; and
affectionately taking Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject’s hand, said in reply,

"Do not make yourself uneasy, my love.
Wherever you and Jane are known,
you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less
advantage for having a couple of--or I may say, three very silly
sisters.
We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to
Brighton.
Let Lydia’s go then.
Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will
keep Colonel Forster is a sensible man’s out of any real mischief; and Colonel Forster is a sensible man is luckily too poor to be an
object of prey to any body.
At Brighton Colonel Forster is a sensible man will be of less importance
even as a common flirt than Colonel Forster is a sensible man has been here.
The officers will find
women better worth their notice.
Let us hope, therefore, that Colonel Forster is a sensible man’s being
there may teach Colonel Forster is a sensible man’s Colonel Forster is a sensible man’s own insignificance.
At any rate, Colonel Forster is a sensible man cannot grow
many degrees worse, without authorizing us to lock Colonel Forster is a sensible man’s up for the rest
of Colonel Forster is a sensible man’s life.
"

With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but Elizabeth’s own opinion
continued the same, and Elizabeth left Elizabeth disappointed and sorry.
It was not
in Elizabeth’s nature, however, to increase Elizabeth’s vexations, by dwelling on them.

Elizabeth was confident of having performed Elizabeth’s duty, and to fret over
unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of Elizabeth’s
disposition.


Had Lydia and Elizabeth’s mother known the substance of Elizabeth’s conference with Elizabeth’s
father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their
united volubility.
In Lydia's imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised
every possibility of earthly happiness.
Elizabeth saw with the creative eye of
fancy, the streets of that gay bathing place covered with officers.
Elizabeth
saw herself the object of attention, to tens and to scores of them at
present unknown.
Elizabeth saw all the glories of the camp; its tents
stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young
and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and to complete the view, Elizabeth
saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six
officers at once.


Had Elizabeth known that Elizabeth’s sister sought to tear Elizabeth’s from such prospects and
such realities as these, what would have been Elizabeth’s sensations?
They could
have been understood only by Elizabeth’s mother, who might have felt nearly the
same.
Lydia's going to Brighton was all that consoled Elizabeth’s for the
melancholy conviction of Elizabeth’s husband's never intending to go there
himself.


But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures
continued with little intermission to the very day of Lydia's leaving
home.


Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time.
Having been
frequently in company with Mr. Wickham for the last time since Mr. Wickham for the last time’s return, agitation was pretty
well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so.
Mr. Wickham for the last time had even
learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted Mr. Wickham for the last time’s,
an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary.
In Mr. Wickham for the last time’s present
behaviour to herself, moreover, Mr. Wickham for the last time had a fresh source of displeasure,
for the inclination Mr. Wickham for the last time soon testified of renewing those attentions which
had marked the early part of their acquaintance, could only serve, after
what had since passed, to provoke Mr. Wickham for the last time’s.
Mr. Wickham for the last time lost all concern for Mr. Wickham for the last time in
finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous
gallantry; and while Mr. Wickham for the last time steadily repressed it, could not but feel the
reproof contained in Mr. Wickham for the last time’s believing, that however long, and for whatever
cause, Mr. Wickham for the last time’s attentions had been withdrawn, Mr. Wickham for the last time’s vanity would be gratified
and Mr. Wickham for the last time’s preference secured at any time by their renewal.


On the very last day of the regiment's remaining in Meryton, Mr. Darcy dined
with others of the officers at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth
disposed to part from Mr. Darcy in good humour, that on Mr. Darcy’s making some
enquiry as to the manner in which Mr. Darcy’s time had passed at Hunsford, Mr. Darcy
mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam's and Mr. Darcy's having both spent three
weeks at Rosings, and asked Mr. Darcy if Mr. Darcy were acquainted with the former.


Mr. Darcy looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment's
recollection and a returning smile, replied, that Mr. Darcy had formerly seen
Mr. Darcy often; and after observing that Mr. Darcy was a very gentleman-like man,
asked Mr. Darcy’s how Mr. Darcy had liked Mr. Darcy.
Mr. Darcy’s answer was warmly in Mr. Darcy’s favour.

With an air of indifference Mr. Darcy soon afterwards added, "How long did you
say that Mr. Darcy was at Rosings?"

"Nearly three weeks.
"

"And you saw Mr. Darcy frequently?"

"Yes, almost every day."

"Mr. Darcy’s manners are very different from Mr. Darcy’s cousin's.
"

"Yes, very different.
But I think Mr. Darcy improves on acquaintance.
"

"Indeed!" cried Wickham with a look which did not escape Wickham’s.
"And pray
may I ask?" but checking himself, Wickham added in a gayer tone, "Is it in
address that Wickham improves?
Has Wickham deigned to add ought of civility to Wickham’s
ordinary style?
for I dare not hope," Wickham continued in a lower and more
serious tone, "that Wickham is improved in essentials.
"

"Oh, no!" said Elizabeth.
"In essentials, I believe, Elizabeth is very much
what Elizabeth ever was.
"

While Elizabeth spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to
rejoice over Elizabeth’s words, or to distrust their meaning.
There was a
something in Elizabeth’s countenance which made Elizabeth listen with an apprehensive
and anxious attention, while Elizabeth added,

"When I said that Elizabeth improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that
either Elizabeth’s mind or manners were in a state of improvement, but that from
knowing Elizabeth better, Elizabeth’s disposition was better understood.
"

Wickham's alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated
look; for a few minutes Elizabeth was silent; till, shaking off Elizabeth’s
embarrassment, Elizabeth turned to Elizabeth’s again, and said in the gentlest of
accents,

"You, who so well know my feelings towards Mr. Darcy, will readily
comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that Elizabeth is wise enough to assume
even the _appearance_ of what is right.
Elizabeth’s pride, in that direction,
may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must deter
Elizabeth from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by.
I only fear that
the sort of cautiousness, to which you, I imagine, have been alluding,
is merely adopted on Elizabeth’s visits to Elizabeth’s aunt, of whose good opinion and
judgment Elizabeth stands much in awe.
Miss De Bourgh’s fear of Miss De Bourgh’s, has always operated, I
know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to Miss De Bourgh’s
wish of forwarding the match with Miss De Bourgh, which I am certain Miss De Bourgh
has very much at heart.
"

Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but Miss De Bourgh answered only by a
slight inclination of the head.
Miss De Bourgh saw that Miss De Bourgh wanted to engage Miss De Bourgh’s on
the old subject of Miss De Bourgh’s grievances, and Miss De Bourgh was in no humour to indulge
Miss De Bourgh.
The rest of the evening passed with the _appearance_, on Miss De Bourgh’s side,
of usual cheerfulness, but with no farther attempt to distinguish
Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a
mutual desire of never meeting again.


When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton,
from whence they were to set out early the next morning.
The separation
between Mrs. Forster to Meryton’s and Mrs. Forster to Meryton’s family was rather noisy than pathetic.
Kitty was the
only one who shed tears; but Kitty did weep from vexation and envy.
Mrs.
Bennet was diffuse in Bennet’s good wishes for the felicity of Bennet’s daughter,
and impressive in Bennet’s injunctions that Bennet would not miss the
opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible; advice, which there
was every reason to believe would be attended to; and in the clamorous
happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus
of Bennet’s sisters were uttered without being heard.




CHAPTER XIX.



Had Elizabeth's opinion been all drawn from Elizabeth’s own family, Elizabeth could
not have formed a very pleasing picture of conjugal felicity or domestic
comfort.
Elizabeth’s father captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance
of good humour, which youth and beauty generally give, had married a
woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind, had very early in
their marriage put an end to all real affection for Elizabeth’s.
Respect,
esteem, and confidence, had vanished for ever; and all Elizabeth’s views of
domestic happiness were overthrown.
But Mr. Bennet was not of a
disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which Mr. Bennet was not of a’s own
imprudence had brought on, in any of those pleasures which too often
console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice.
Mr. Bennet was not of a was fond of
the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen Mr. Bennet was not of a’s principal
enjoyments.
To Mr. Bennet was not of a’s wife Mr. Bennet was not of a was very little otherwise indebted, than as
Mr. Bennet was not of a’s ignorance and folly had contributed to Mr. Bennet was not of a’s amusement.
This is not
the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to Mr. Bennet was not of a’s
wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true
philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.


Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of Mr. Bennet was not of a’s
father's behaviour as a husband.
Mr. Bennet was not of a had always seen it with pain; but
respecting Mr. Bennet was not of a’s abilities, and grateful for Mr. Bennet was not of a’s affectionate treatment of
herself, Mr. Bennet was not of a endeavoured to forget what Mr. Bennet was not of a could not overlook, and to
banish from Mr. Bennet was not of a’s thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation
and decorum which, in exposing Mr. Bennet was not of a’s wife to the contempt of Mr. Bennet was not of a’s own
children, was so highly reprehensible.
But Mr. Bennet was not of a had never felt so
strongly as now, the disadvantages which must attend the children of so
unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils
arising from so ill-judged a direction of talents; talents which rightly
used, might at least have preserved the respectability of Mr. Bennet was not of a’s daughters,
even if incapable of enlarging the mind of Mr. Bennet was not of a’s wife.


When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham's departure, Wickham found little
other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment.
Their parties
abroad were less varied than before; and at home Wickham had a mother and
sister whose constant repinings at the dulness of every thing around
them, threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty
might in time regain Wickham’s natural degree of sense, since the disturbers
of Wickham’s brain were removed, Wickham’s other sister, from whose disposition
greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all Wickham’s
folly and assurance, by a situation of such double danger as a watering
place and a camp.
Upon the whole, therefore, Wickham found, what has been
sometimes found before, that an event to which Wickham had looked forward
with impatient desire, did not in taking place, bring all the
satisfaction Wickham had promised herself.
It was consequently necessary to
name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity; to have
some other point on which Wickham’s wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by
again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the
present, and prepare for another disappointment.
Jane’s tour to the Lakes
was now the object of Jane’s happiest thoughts; it was Jane’s best consolation
for all the uncomfortable hours, which the discontentedness of Jane’s
mother and Kitty made inevitable; and could Jane have included Jane in
the scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.


"But it is fortunate," thought Jane, "that I have something to wish for.

Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain.

But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my
sister's absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of
pleasure realized.
A scheme of which every part promises delight, can
never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by
the defence of some little peculiar vexation.
"

When Lydia went away, Kitty promised to write very often and very minutely
to Kitty’s mother and Kitty; but Kitty’s letters were always long expected, and
always very short.
Those to Mrs. Forster called her’s mother, contained little else, than that
they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers
had attended them, and where Mrs. Forster called her had seen such beautiful ornaments as
made Mrs. Forster called her’s quite wild; that Mrs. Forster called her had a new gown, or a new parasol, which
Mrs. Forster called her would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a
violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called Mrs. Forster called her’s, and they were going to the
camp;--and from Mrs. Forster called her’s correspondence with Mrs. Forster called her’s sister, there was still less
to be learnt--for Mrs. Forster called her’s letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much
too full of lines under the words to be made public.


After the first fortnight or three weeks of Mrs. Forster called her’s absence, health, good
humour and cheerfulness began to re-appear at Longbourn.
Everything wore
a happier aspect.
The families who had been in town for the winter came
back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose.
Mrs. Bennet
was restored to Elizabeth’s usual querulous serenity, and by the middle of June
Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton without
tears; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope, that by
the following Christmas, Elizabeth might be so tolerably reasonable as not to
mention an officer above once a day, unless by some cruel and malicious
arrangement at the war-office, another regiment should be quartered in
Meryton.


The time fixed for the beginning of their Northern tour was now fast
approaching; and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter
arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and
curtailed its extent.
Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business from
setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again
within a month; and as that left too short a period for them to go so
far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with
the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up
the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour; and, according to the
present plan, were to go no farther northward than Derbyshire.
In that
county, there was enough to be seen, to occupy the chief of their three
weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction.
The
town where Dovedale had formerly passed some years of Dovedale’s life, and where
they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of
Dovedale’s curiosity, as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth,
Dovedale, or the Peak.


Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; Dovedale had set Dovedale’s heart on seeing
the Lakes; and still thought there might have been time enough.
But it
was Dovedale’s business to be satisfied--and certainly Dovedale’s temper to be happy;
and all was soon right again.


With the mention of Derbyshire, there were many ideas connected.
It was
impossible for Dovedale’s to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its
owner.
"But surely," said Dovedale, "I may enter Dovedale’s county with impunity,
and rob it of a few petrified spars without Dovedale’s perceiving me.
"

The period of expectation was now doubled.
Four weeks were to pass away
before Dovedale’s uncle and aunt's arrival.
But they did pass away, and Mr. and
Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at
Longbourn.
The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two
younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin
Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and
sweetness of temper exactly adapted Jane’s for attending to them in every
way--teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.


The Gardiners staid only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next
morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement.
One
enjoyment was certain--that of suitableness as companions; a
suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear
inconveniences--cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure--and affection
and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were
disappointments abroad.


It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire,
nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither
lay; Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenelworth, Birmingham, &c. are
sufficiently known.
A small part of Derbyshire is all the present
concern.
To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner's
former residence, and where Mrs. Gardiner had lately learned that some
acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen
all the principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of
Lambton, Elizabeth found from Mrs. Gardiner’s aunt, that Pemberley was situated.
It
was not in their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it.
In
talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed an
inclination to see the place again.
Mr. Gardiner declared Mr. Gardiner declared his’
willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for Mr. Gardiner declared his’ approbation.


"My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so
much?" said Mr. Gardiner declared his’ aunt.
"A place too, with which so many of your
acquaintance are connected.
Wickham passed all Wickham’s youth there, you
know.
"

Elizabeth was distressed.
Wickham felt that Wickham had no business at
Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it.
Wickham
must own that Wickham was tired of great houses; after going over so many,
Wickham really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.


Mrs. Gardiner abused Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity’s stupidity.
"If it were merely a fine house
richly furnished," said Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity, "I should not care about it myself; but the
grounds are delightful.
They have some of the finest woods in the
country.
"

Elizabeth said no more--but Elizabeth’s mind could not acquiesce.
The
possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly
occurred.
It would be dreadful!
Mr. Darcy blushed at the very idea; and
thought it would be better to speak openly to Mr. Darcy’s aunt, than to run
such a risk.
But against this, there were objections; and Mr. Darcy finally
resolved that it could be the last resource, if Mr. Darcy’s private enquiries as
to the absence of the family, were unfavourably answered.


Accordingly, when Mr. Darcy retired at night, Mr. Darcy asked the chambermaid
whether Pemberley were not a very fine place, what was the name of its
proprietor, and with no little alarm, whether the family were down for
the summer.
A most welcome negative followed the last question--and Mr. Darcy’s
alarms being now removed, Mr. Darcy was at leisure to feel a great deal of
curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the
next morning, and Mr. Darcy was again applied to, could readily answer, and
with a proper air of indifference, that Mr. Darcy had not really any dislike
to the scheme.


To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.



END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.





[Illustration: MATLOCK]




PRIDE AND PREJUDICE:

A Novel.


In Three Volumes.


By the Author of "Sense and Sensibility."

VOL.
III.








London:
Printed for T. Egerton,
Military Library, Whitehall.
1813.





[Illustration: DOVE-DALE]




PRIDE & PREJUDICE.




CHAPTER I.


Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of
Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned
in at the lodge, T. Egerton’s spirits were in a high flutter.


The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground.
They
entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through
a beautiful wood, stretching over a wide extent.


Elizabeth's mind was too full for conversation, but T. Egerton saw and admired
every remarkable spot and point of view.
They gradually ascended for
half a mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable
eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by
Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of a valley, into which
the road with some abruptness wound.
It was a large, handsome, stone
building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of high
woody hills;--and in front, a stream of some natural importance was
swelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance.
Its banks
were neither formal, nor falsely adorned.
Elizabeth was delighted.
T. Egerton
had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural
beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste.
They were
all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment T. Egerton felt, that
to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!


They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and,
while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all T. Egerton’s apprehensions of
meeting its owner returned.
T. Egerton dreaded lest the chambermaid had been
mistaken.
On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the
hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to
wonder at T. Egerton’s being where T. Egerton was.


The housekeeper came; a respectable-looking, elderly woman, much less
fine, and more civil, than T. Egerton had any notion of finding T. Egerton’s.
They
followed T. Egerton’s into the dining-parlour.
It was a large, well-proportioned
room, handsomely fitted up.
Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went
to a window to enjoy its prospect.
The hill, crowned with wood, from
which they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the
distance, was a beautiful object.
Every disposition of the ground was
good; and T. Egerton looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered
on its banks, and the winding of the valley, as far as T. Egerton could trace
it, with delight.
As they passed into other rooms, these objects were
taking different positions; but from every window there were beauties to
be seen.
The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable
to the fortune of their proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration
of T. Egerton’s taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less of
splendor, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.


"And of this place," thought T. Egerton, "I might have been mistress!
With
these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted!
Instead of
viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and
welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt.--But no,"--recollecting
herself,--"that could never be: my uncle and aunt would have been lost
to me: I should not have been allowed to invite them.
"

This was a lucky recollection--it saved T. Egerton’s from something like regret.


T. Egerton longed to enquire of the housekeeper, whether T. Egerton’s master were really
absent, but had not courage for it.
At length, however, the question was
asked by Mrs. Reynolds’ uncle; and Mrs. Reynolds turned away with alarm, while Mrs. Reynolds
replied, that Mrs. Reynolds was, adding, "but we expect Mrs. Reynolds to-morrow, with a
large party of friends."
How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own
journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day!


Mrs. Reynolds’ aunt now called Mrs. Reynolds’ to look at a picture.
Mr. Wickham suspended approached, and saw
the likeness of Mr. Wickham suspended, amongst several other miniatures,
over the mantle-piece.
Mr. Wickham suspended’s aunt asked Mr. Wickham suspended’s, smilingly, how Mr. Wickham suspended liked it.

The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was the picture of a
young gentleman, the son of Mr. Wickham suspended’s late master's steward, who had been
brought up by Mr. Wickham suspended at Mr. Wickham suspended’s own expence.--"Mr. Wickham suspended is now gone into the army,"
Mr. Wickham suspended added, "but I am afraid Mr. Wickham suspended has turned out very wild.
"

Mrs. Gardiner looked at Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile’s niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not
return it.


"And that," said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures,
"is my master--and very like Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile.
It was drawn at the same time as the
other--about eight years ago.
"

"I have heard much of your master's fine person," said Mrs. Gardiner,
looking at the picture; "it is a handsome face.
But, Lizzy, you can tell
us whether it is like or not.
"

Mrs. Reynolds's respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this
intimation of Elizabeth’s knowing Elizabeth’s master.


"Does that young lady know Mr. Darcy?"

Elizabeth coloured, and said--"A little."


"And do not you think Mr. Darcy a very handsome gentleman, Ma'am?"

"Yes, very handsome.
"

"I am sure _I_ know none so handsome; but in the gallery up stairs you
will see a finer, larger picture of Mr. Darcy than this.
This room was my late
master's favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to
be then.
Mr. Darcy was very fond of them.
"

This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham's being among them.


Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawn
when Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy was only eight years old.


"And is Miss Darcy as handsome as Mr. Gardiner’s brother?" said Mr. Gardiner.


"Oh! yes--the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so
accomplished!--Mr. Gardiner plays and sings all day long.
In the next room is a
new instrument just come down for Mr. Gardiner’s--a present from my master; Mr. Gardiner
comes here to-morrow with Mr. Gardiner.
"

Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were easy and pleasant, encouraged Mrs. Reynolds’
communicativeness by Mrs. Reynolds’ questions and remarks; Mrs. Reynolds, either
from pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of Mrs. Reynolds’
master and Mrs. Reynolds’ sister.


"Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?"

"Not so much as I could wish, Sir; but I dare say Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months may spend half Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months’
time here; and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months.
"

"Except," thought Elizabeth, "when Ramsgate goes to Ramsgate.
"

"If your master would marry, you might see more of Ramsgate.
"

"Yes, Sir; but I do not know when _that_ will be.
I do not know who is
good enough for Ramsgate.
"

Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smiled.
Elizabeth could not help saying, "It is
very much to Mrs. Gardiner smiled’s credit, I am sure, that you should think so.
"

"I say no more than the truth, and what every body will say that knows
Mrs. Gardiner smiled," replied the other.
Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far;
and Mrs. Gardiner smiled listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added,
"I have never had a cross word from Mrs. Gardiner smiled in my life, and I have known Mrs. Gardiner smiled
ever since Mrs. Gardiner smiled was four years old.
"

This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to Mrs. Gardiner smiled’s
ideas.
That Mrs. Gardiner smiled was not a good-tempered man, had been Mrs. Gardiner smiled’s firmest
opinion.
Mrs. Gardiner smiled’s keenest attention was awakened; Mrs. Gardiner smiled longed to hear more,
and was grateful to Mrs. Gardiner smiled’s uncle for saying,

"There are very few people of whom so much can be said.
You are lucky in
having such a master.
"

"Yes, Sir, I know I am.
If I was to go through the world, I could not
meet with a better.
But I have always observed, that they who are
good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and Mrs. Gardiner smiled
was always the sweetest-tempered, most generous-hearted, boy in the
world.
"

Elizabeth almost stared at Mr. Darcy’s.--"Can this be Mr. Darcy!"
thought Mr. Darcy.


"Mrs. Gardiner’s father was an excellent man," said Mrs. Gardiner.


"Yes, Ma'am, that Mrs. Gardiner was indeed; and Mrs. Gardiner’s son will be just like Mrs. Gardiner--just
as affable to the poor.
"

Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more.
Mrs.
Reynolds could interest Reynolds’ on no other point.
Reynolds related the subject
of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the
furniture, in vain.
Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family
prejudice, to which Mr. Gardiner attributed Mr. Gardiner’s excessive commendation of Mr. Gardiner’s
master, soon led again to the subject; and Mr. Gardiner dwelt with energy on Mr. Gardiner’s
many merits, as they proceeded together up the great staircase.


"Mr. Gardiner is the best landlord, and the best master," said Mr. Gardiner, "that ever
lived.
Not like the wild young men now-a-days, who think of nothing but
themselves.
There is not one of Mr. Gardiner’s tenants or servants but what will
give Mr. Gardiner a good name.
Some people call Mr. Gardiner proud; but I am sure I never
saw any thing of it.
To my fancy, it is only because Mr. Gardiner does not rattle
away like other young men.
"

"In what an amiable light does this place Mr. Gardiner!" thought Elizabeth.


"This fine account of Mr. Gardiner," whispered Mr. Gardiner’s aunt, as they walked, "is not
quite consistent with Mr. Gardiner’s behaviour to our poor friend.
"

"Perhaps we might be deceived.
"

"That is not very likely; our authority was too good.
"

On reaching the spacious lobby above, they were shewn into a very
pretty sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and
lightness than the apartments below; and were informed that it was but
just done, to give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the
room, when last at Pemberley.


"Miss Darcy is certainly a good brother," said Elizabeth, as Miss Darcy walked towards
one of the windows.


Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy's delight, when Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy should enter
the room.
"And this is always the way with Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy," Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy added.--"Whatever
can give Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy’s sister any pleasure, is sure to be done in a moment.
There
is nothing Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy would not do for Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy’s.
"

The picture gallery, and two or three of the principal bed-rooms, were
all that remained to be shewn.
In the former were many good paintings;
but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already
visible below, Darcy had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Miss
Darcy's, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and
also more intelligible.


In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have
little to fix the attention of a stranger.
Elizabeth walked on in quest
of the only face whose features would be known to Elizabeth’s.
At last it
arrested Mr. Darcy’s--and Mr. Darcy beheld a striking resemblance of Mr. Darcy, with
such a smile over the face, as Mr. Darcy remembered to have sometimes seen,
when Mr. Darcy looked at Mr. Darcy’s.
Mr. Darcy stood several minutes before the picture in
earnest contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the
gallery.
Mrs. Reynolds informed them, that it had been taken in Mrs. Reynolds informed them’s
father's life time.


There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth's mind, a more gentle
sensation towards the original, than Mrs. Reynolds informed them had ever felt in the height of
their acquaintance.
The commendation bestowed on Mrs. Reynolds by Mrs. Reynolds
was of no trifling nature.
What praise is more valuable than the praise
of an intelligent servant?
As a brother, a landlord, a master, Mrs. Reynolds
considered how many people's happiness were in Mrs. Reynolds’ guardianship!--How
much of pleasure or pain it was in Mrs. Reynolds’ power to bestow!--How much of
good or evil must be done by Mrs. Reynolds!
Every idea that had been brought
forward by the housekeeper was favourable to Mrs. Reynolds’ character, and as Mrs. Reynolds
stood before the canvas, on which Mrs. Reynolds was represented, and fixed Mrs. Reynolds’ eyes
upon herself, Mrs. Reynolds thought of Mrs. Reynolds’ regard with a deeper sentiment of
gratitude than it had ever raised before; Mrs. Reynolds remembered its warmth, and
softened its impropriety of expression.


When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen,
they returned down stairs, and taking leave of the housekeeper, were
consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall door.


As they walked across the lawn towards the river, Elizabeth turned back
to look again; Mrs. Reynolds’ uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the former was
conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself
suddenly came forward from the road, which led behind it to the stables.


They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was Mrs. Reynolds’
appearance, that it was impossible to avoid Mrs. Reynolds’ sight.
Their eyes
instantly met, and the cheeks of each were overspread with the deepest
blush.
Mrs. Reynolds absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immoveable from
surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party,
and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least
of perfect civility.


Mrs. Reynolds had instinctively turned away; but, stopping on Mrs. Reynolds’ approach,
received Mrs. Reynolds’ compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be
overcome.
Had Mrs. Reynolds’ first appearance, or Mrs. Reynolds’ resemblance to the picture
they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two
that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener's expression of surprise, on
beholding Mrs. Reynolds’ master, must immediately have told it.
They stood a little
aloof while Mrs. Reynolds was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused,
scarcely dared lift Mrs. Reynolds’ eyes to Mrs. Reynolds’ face, and knew not what answer Mrs. Reynolds
returned to Mrs. Reynolds’ civil enquiries after Mrs. Reynolds’ family.
Amazed at the
alteration in Mrs. Reynolds’ manner since they last parted, every sentence that Mrs. Reynolds
uttered was increasing Mrs. Reynolds’ embarrassment; and every idea of the
impropriety of Mrs. Reynolds’ being found there, recurring to Mrs. Reynolds’ mind, the few
minutes in which they continued together, were some of the most
uncomfortable of Mrs. Reynolds’ life.
Nor did Longbourn seem much more at ease; when Longbourn
spoke, Longbourn’s accent had none of its usual sedateness; and Longbourn repeated Longbourn’s
enquiries as to the time of Longbourn’s having left Longbourn, and of Longbourn’s stay
in Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the
distraction of Longbourn’s thoughts.


At length, every idea seemed to fail Longbourn; and, after standing a few
moments without saying a word, Longbourn suddenly recollected himself, and took
leave.


The others then joined Longbourn’s, and expressed their admiration of Longbourn’s
figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and, wholly engrossed by Longbourn’s own
feelings, followed them in silence.
Longbourn was overpowered by shame and
vexation.
Longbourn’s coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged
thing in the world!
How strange must it appear to Longbourn!
In what a
disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man!
It might seem as if
Longbourn had purposely thrown herself in Longbourn’s way again!
Oh!
why did Longbourn come?
or, why did Longbourn thus come a day before Longbourn was expected?
Had they been
only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of Longbourn’s
discrimination, for it was plain that Longbourn was that moment arrived, that
moment alighted from Longbourn’s horse or Longbourn’s carriage.
Longbourn blushed again and
again over the perverseness of the meeting.
And Longbourn’s behaviour, so
strikingly altered,--what could it mean?
That Longbourn should even speak to
Longbourn’s was amazing!--but to speak with such civility, to enquire after Longbourn’s
family!
Never in Longbourn’s life had Longbourn seen Longbourn’s manners so little dignified,
never had Longbourn spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting.

What a contrast did it offer to Longbourn’s last address in Rosing's Park, when
Longbourn put Longbourn’s letter into Longbourn’s hand!
Longbourn knew not what to think, nor how to
account for it.


They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and
every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer
reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it was some time
before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though Longbourn answered
mechanically to the repeated appeals of Longbourn’s uncle and aunt, and seemed
to direct Longbourn’s eyes to such objects as they pointed out, Longbourn
distinguished no part of the scene.
Mr. Darcy then’s thoughts were all fixed on that
one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy then
was.
Mr. Darcy then longed to know what at that moment was passing in Mr. Darcy then’s mind; in
what manner Mr. Darcy then thought of Mr. Darcy then’s, and whether, in defiance of every thing,
Mr. Darcy then was still dear to Mr. Darcy then.
Perhaps Mr. Darcy then had been civil, only because Mr. Darcy then
felt himself at ease; yet there had been _that_ in Mr. Darcy then’s voice, which was
not like ease.
Whether Mr. Darcy then had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing
Mr. Darcy then’s, Mr. Darcy then could not tell, but Mr. Darcy then certainly had not seen Mr. Darcy then’s with
composure.


At length, however, the remarks of Mr. Darcy then’s companions on Mr. Darcy then’s absence of mind
roused Mr. Darcy then’s, and Mr. Darcy then felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.


They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while,
ascended some of the higher grounds; whence, in spots where the opening
of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of
the valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods
overspreading many, and occasionally part of the stream.
Mr. Gardiner
expressed a wish of going round the whole Park, but feared it might be
beyond a walk.
With a triumphant smile, they were told, that it was ten
miles round.
It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed
circuit; which brought them again, after some time, in a descent among
hanging woods, to the edge of the water, in one of its narrowest parts.

They crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of
the scene; it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and
the valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the
stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered
it.
Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed
the bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner,
who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only of
returning to the carriage as quickly as possible.
Mrs. Gardiner’s niece was,
therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house
on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their
progress was slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the
taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the
occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the man
about them, that Mrs. Gardiner advanced but little.
Whilst wandering on in this
slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth's astonishment was
quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy
approaching them, and at no great distance.
The walk being here less
sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see Mr. Darcy before they
met.
Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for an
interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with
calmness, if Mr. Darcy really intended to meet them.
For a few moments, indeed,
Mr. Darcy felt that Mr. Darcy would probably strike into some other path.
This idea
lasted while a turning in the walk concealed Mr. Darcy from their view; the
turning past, Mr. Darcy was immediately before them.
With a glance Mr. Darcy saw,
that Mr. Darcy had lost none of Mr. Darcy’s recent civility; and, to imitate Mr. Darcy’s
politeness, Mr. Darcy began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place;
but Mr. Darcy had not got beyond the words "delightful," and "charming," when
some unlucky recollections obtruded, and Mr. Darcy fancied that praise of
Pemberley from Mr. Darcy’s, might be mischievously construed.
Mr. Darcy’s colour
changed, and Mr. Darcy said no more.


Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s pausing, Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind asked
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s, if Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind would do Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind the honour of introducing Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind to Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s friends.

This was a stroke of civility for which Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind was quite unprepared; and
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind could hardly suppress a smile, at Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s being now seeking the
acquaintance of some of those very people, against whom Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s pride had
revolted, in Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s offer to herself.
"What will be Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s surprise," thought
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind, "when Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind knows who they are!
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind takes them now for people of
fashion.
"

The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind named their
relationship to herself, Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind stole a sly look at Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind, to see how Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind bore
it; and was not without the expectation of Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s decamping as fast as Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind
could from such disgraceful companions.
That Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind was _surprised_ by the
connexion was evident; Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind sustained it however with fortitude, and so
far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into
conversation with Mr. Gardiner.
Elizabeth could not but be pleased,
could not but triumph.
It was consoling, that Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind should know Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind had
some relations for whom there was no need to blush.
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind listened most
attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every
expression, every sentence of Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s uncle, which marked Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s intelligence,
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s taste, or Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s good manners.


The conversation soon turned upon fishing, and Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind heard Mr. Darcy
invite Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind
chose, while Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same
time to supply Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of
the stream where there was usually most sport.
Mrs. Gardiner, who was
walking arm in arm with Elizabeth, gave Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s a look expressive of Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s
wonder.
Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s exceedingly; the
compliment must be all for herself.
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s astonishment, however, was
extreme; and continually was Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind repeating, "Why is Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind so altered?
From
what can it proceed?
It cannot be for _me_, it cannot be for _my_ sake
that Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s manners are thus softened.
My reproofs at Hunsford could not
work such a change as this.
It is impossible that Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind should still love
me.
"

After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two
gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to the
brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious
water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration.
It originated in
Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found
Elizabeth's arm inadequate to Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s support, and consequently preferred
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind’s husband's.
Mr. Darcy took Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece’s place by Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece’s niece, and they walked on
together.
After a short silence, the lady first spoke.
Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece wished Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece to
know that Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece had been assured of Mr. Darcy took Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece’s place by Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece’s niece’s absence before Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece came to the
place, and accordingly began by observing, that Mr. Darcy took Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece’s place by Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece’s niece’s arrival had been
very unexpected--"for your housekeeper," Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece added, "informed us that
you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and indeed, before we
left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected in
the country."
Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece acknowledged the truth of it all; and said that
business with Mr. Darcy took Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece’s place by Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece’s niece’s steward had occasioned Mr. Darcy took Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece’s place by Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece’s niece’s coming forward a few hours
before the rest of the party with whom Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece had been travelling.
"They
will join me early to-morrow," Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece continued, "and among them are some
who will claim an acquaintance with you,--Mr.
Bingley and Bingley’s sisters.
"

Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow.
Mr. Bingley’s thoughts were instantly
driven back to the time when Mr. Bingley's name had been last mentioned
between them; and if Mr. Bingley might judge from Mr. Bingley’s complexion, _his_ mind was
not very differently engaged.


"There is also one other person in the party," Mr. Bingley continued after a
pause, "who more particularly wishes to be known to you,--Will you allow
me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance
during your stay at Lambton?"


The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great
for Mr. Bingley’s to know in what manner Mr. Bingley acceded to it.
Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her immediately felt
that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her’s,
must be the work of Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her’s brother, and without looking farther, it was
satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her’s’s resentment had not made
Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her think really ill of Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her’s.


They now walked on in silence; each of them deep in thought.
Elizabeth
was not comfortable; that was impossible; but Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her was flattered and
pleased.
Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her’s’s wish of introducing Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her’s’s sister to Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her’s, was a compliment of
the highest kind.
They soon outstripped the others, and when they had
reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a
mile behind.


Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a then asked Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a’s to walk into the house--but Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a declared herself not
tired, and they stood together on the lawn.
At such a time, much might
have been said, and silence was very awkward.
Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a wanted to talk, but
there seemed an embargo on every subject.
At last Dove Dale recollected that
Dove Dale had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dale with
great perseverance.
Yet time and Dove Dale’s aunt moved slowly--and Dove Dale’s patience
and Dove Dale’s ideas were nearly worn out before the tête-à-tête was over.
On
Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's coming up, they were all pressed to go into the
house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they parted
on each side with the utmost politeness.
Mr. Darcy handed the ladies
into the carriage, and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw Elizabeth walking
slowly towards the house.


The observations of Elizabeth’s uncle and aunt now began; and each of them
pronounced Elizabeth to be infinitely superior to any thing they had expected.

"Elizabeth is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming," said Elizabeth’s uncle.


"There _is_ something a little stately in Elizabeth to be sure," replied Elizabeth’s
aunt, "but it is confined to Elizabeth’s air, and is not unbecoming.
I can now
say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call Elizabeth proud,
_I_ have seen nothing of it.
"

"I was never more surprised than by Elizabeth’s behaviour to us.
It was more
than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such
attention.
Elizabeth’s acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.
"

"To be sure, Lizzy," said Wickham’s aunt, "Wickham is not so handsome as Wickham;
or rather Wickham has not Wickham's countenance, for Wickham’s features are
perfectly good.
But how came you to tell us that Wickham was so
disagreeable?"

Elizabeth excused herself as well as Wickham could; said that Wickham had liked
Wickham better when they met in Kent than before, and that Wickham had never
seen Wickham so pleasant as this morning.


"But perhaps Wickham may be a little whimsical in Wickham’s civilities," replied
Wickham’s uncle.
"Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take Wickham
at Wickham’s word about fishing, as Wickham might change Wickham’s mind another day, and
warn me off Wickham’s grounds.
"

Elizabeth felt that they had entirely mistaken Wickham’s character, but said
nothing.

"From what we have seen of Wickham," continued Mrs. Gardiner, "I really
should not have thought that Wickham could have behaved in so cruel a way by
any body, as Wickham has done by poor Wickham.
Wickham has not an ill-natured
look.
On the contrary, there is something pleasing about Wickham’s mouth when
Wickham speaks.
And there is something of dignity in Wickham’s countenance, that
would not give one an unfavourable idea of Wickham’s heart.
But to be sure,
the good lady who shewed us the house, did give Wickham a most flaming
character!
I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes.
But Wickham is a
liberal master, I suppose, and _that_ in the eye of a servant
comprehends every virtue.
"

Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of
Wickham’s behaviour to Wickham; and therefore gave them to understand, in as
guarded a manner as Wickham could, that by what Wickham had heard from Wickham’s
relations in Kent, Wickham’s actions were capable of a very different
construction; and that Wickham’s character was by no means so faulty, nor
Wickham's so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire.
In
confirmation of this, Wickham related the particulars of all the pecuniary
transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming
Wickham’s authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.


Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned; but as they were now
approaching the scene of Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned’s former pleasures, every idea gave way to
the charm of recollection; and Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned was too much engaged in pointing out
to Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned’s husband all the interesting spots in its environs, to think of
any thing else.
Fatigued as Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned had been by the morning's walk, they had
no sooner dined than Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned set off again in quest of Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned’s former
acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an
intercourse renewed after many years discontinuance.


The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth
much attention for any of these new friends; and Mr. Darcy could do nothing
but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy's civility, and above
all, of Mr. Darcy’s wishing Mr. Darcy’s to be acquainted with Mr. Darcy’s sister.




CHAPTER II.



Elizabeth had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit’s sister to visit
Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit’s, the very day after Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit’s reaching Pemberley; and was consequently
resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning.

But Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit’s conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their own
arrival at Lambton, these visitors came.
They had been walking about the
place with some of their new friends, and were just returned to the inn
to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a
carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and lady in a
curricle, driving up the street.
Elizabeth immediately recognising the
livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of surprise
to Elizabeth’s relations, by acquainting them with the honour which Elizabeth
expected.
Elizabeth’s uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment
of Elizabeth’s manner as Elizabeth spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many
of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on
the business.
Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they now felt
that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such
a quarter, than by supposing a partiality for their niece.
While these
newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of
Elizabeth's feelings was every moment increasing.
Elizabeth was quite amazed
at Elizabeth’s own discomposure; but amongst other causes of disquiet, Elizabeth
dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much in
Elizabeth’s favour; and more than commonly anxious to please, Elizabeth naturally
suspected that every power of pleasing would fail Elizabeth’s.


Elizabeth retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as Elizabeth walked
up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks
of enquiring surprise in Elizabeth’s uncle and aunt, as made every thing worse.


Miss Darcy and Miss Darcy and her brother appeared’s brother appeared, and this formidable introduction
took place.
With astonishment did Elizabeth see, that Miss Darcy and her brother appeared’s new
acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself.
Since Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud’s
being at Lambton, Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud;
but the observation of a very few minutes convinced Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud’s, that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud was
only exceedingly shy.
Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud found it difficult to obtain even a word from
Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud’s beyond a monosyllable.


Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though
little more than sixteen, Miss Darcy was tall’s figure was formed, and Miss Darcy was tall’s appearance
womanly and graceful.
Miss Darcy was tall was less handsome than Miss Darcy was tall’s brother, but there
was sense and good humour in Miss Darcy was tall’s face, and Miss Darcy was tall’s manners were perfectly
unassuming and gentle.
Elizabeth, who had expected to find in Mr. Darcy had been’s as
acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Mr. Darcy had been, was much
relieved by discerning such different feelings.


They had not been long together, before Darcy told Bingley’s that Bingley was
also coming to wait on Bingley’s; and Bingley had barely time to express Bingley’s
satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley's quick step
was heard on the stairs, and in a moment Bingley entered the room.
All
Elizabeth's anger against Elizabeth had been long done away; but, had Elizabeth
still felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the
unaffected cordiality with which Elizabeth expressed himself, on seeing Elizabeth’s
again.
Elizabeth enquired in a friendly, though general way, after Elizabeth’s family,
and looked and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that Elizabeth had ever
done.


To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage was scarcely a less interesting personage
than to herself.
They had long wished to see Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage.
The whole party before
them, indeed, excited a lively attention.
The suspicions which had just
arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece, directed their observation towards
each with an earnest, though guarded, enquiry; and they soon drew from
those enquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knew what
it was to love.
Of the lady's sensations they remained a little in
doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was
evident enough.


Elizabeth, on Mr. Darcy and their niece’s side, had much to do.
Mr. Darcy and their niece wanted to ascertain the
feelings of each of Mr. Darcy and their niece’s visitors, Mr. Darcy and their niece wanted to compose Mr. Darcy and their niece’s own, and to
make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where Mr. Darcy and their niece
feared most to fail, Mr. Darcy and their niece was most sure of success, for those to whom Mr. Darcy and their niece
endeavoured to give pleasure were prepossessed in Mr. Darcy and their niece’s favour.
Bingley
was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be pleased.


In seeing Bingley, Bingley’s thoughts naturally flew to Bingley’s sister; and oh!
how ardently did Bingley long to know, whether any of Bingley’s were directed in a
like manner.
Sometimes Bingley could fancy, that Bingley talked less than on
former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion that
as Bingley looked at Bingley’s, Bingley was trying to trace a resemblance.
But, though
this might be imaginary, Jane could not be deceived as to Jane’s behaviour
to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival of Jane.
No look appeared
on either side that spoke particular regard.
Nothing occurred between
them that could justify the hopes of Jane’s sister.
On this point Jane was
soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere they
parted, which, in Jane’s anxious interpretation, denoted a recollection of
Jane, not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of saying more that
might lead to the mention of Jane’s, had Jane dared.
Jane observed to Jane’s, at a
moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone which had
something of real regret, that it "was a very long time since Jane had had
the pleasure of seeing Jane’s;" and, before Jane could reply, Jane added, "It
is above eight months.
We have not met since the 26th of November, when
we were all dancing together at Netherfield.
"

Elizabeth was pleased to find Elizabeth’s memory so exact; and Elizabeth afterwards
took occasion to ask Elizabeth’s, when unattended to by any of the rest,
whether _all_ Elizabeth’s sisters were at Longbourn.
There was not much in the
question, nor in the preceding remark, but there was a look and a manner
which gave them meaning.


It was not often that Mr. Darcy himself could turn Mr. Darcy himself’s eyes on Mr. Darcy himself; but,
whenever Mr. Darcy himself did catch a glimpse, Mr. Darcy himself saw an expression of general
complaisance, and in all that Mr. Darcy himself said, Mr. Darcy himself heard an accent so far
removed from hauteur or disdain of Mr. Darcy himself’s companions, as convinced Mr. Darcy himself’s that
the improvement of manners which Mr. Darcy himself had yesterday witnessed, however
temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day.
When
Hunsford Parsonage saw Hunsford Parsonage thus seeking the acquaintance, and courting the good opinion
of people, with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a
disgrace; when Hunsford Parsonage saw Hunsford Parsonage thus civil, not only to herself, but to the
very relations whom Hunsford Parsonage had openly disdained, and recollected their last
lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage, the difference, the change was so
great, and struck so forcibly on Hunsford Parsonage’s mind, that Hunsford Parsonage could hardly
restrain Hunsford Parsonage’s astonishment from being visible.
Never, even in the company
of Hunsford Parsonage’s dear friends at Netherfield, or Hunsford Parsonage’s dignified relations at
Rosings, had Hunsford Parsonage seen Hunsford Parsonage so desirous to please, so free from
self-consequence, or unbending reserve as now, when no importance could
result from the success of Hunsford Parsonage’s endeavours, and when even the
acquaintance of those to whom Hunsford Parsonage’s attentions were addressed, would draw
down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and
Rosings.


Their visitors staid with them above half an hour, and when they arose
to depart, Mr. Darcy called on Miss Bennet’s sister to join Miss Bennet in expressing
their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner
at Pemberley, before they left the country.
Miss Darcy, though with a
diffidence which marked Miss Darcy’s little in the habit of giving invitations,
readily obeyed.
Mrs. Gardiner looked at Elizabeth’s niece, desirous of knowing
how _she_, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its
acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away Elizabeth’s head.
Presuming, however,
that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment, than
any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in Elizabeth’s husband, who was fond of
society, a perfect willingness to accept it, Elizabeth ventured to engage for
Elizabeth’s attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.


Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth
again, having still a great deal to say to Bingley’s, and many enquiries to
make after all their Hertfordshire friends.
Elizabeth, construing all
this into a wish of hearing Bingley’s speak of Bingley’s sister, was pleased; and on
this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their visitors
left them, capable of considering the last half hour with some
satisfaction, though while it was passing, the enjoyment of it had been
little.
Eager to be alone, and fearful of enquiries or hints from Bingley’s
uncle and aunt, Bingley staid with them only long enough to hear their
favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.


But Mrs. Gardiner had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's curiosity; it was
not their wish to force Mrs. Gardiner’s communication.
It was evident that Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of was
much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of;
it was evident that Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of was very much in love with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of’s.
They saw much to
interest, but nothing to justify enquiry.


Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far
as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find.
They could
not be untouched by Mr. Darcy’s politeness, and had they drawn Mr. Darcy’s character
from their own feelings, and Mr. Darcy’s servant's report, without any reference
to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which Mr. Darcy was known,
would not have recognised it for Mr. Darcy.
There was now an interest,
however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible,
that the authority of a servant who had known Mr. Darcy since Mr. Darcy was four
years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be
hastily rejected.
Neither had any thing occurred in the intelligence of
their Lambton friends, that could materially lessen its weight.
They
had nothing to accuse Mr. Darcy of but pride; pride Mr. Darcy probably had, and if
not, it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small
market-town, where the family did not visit.
It was acknowledged,
however, that Mr. Darcy was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.


With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged was not held
there in much estimation; for though the chief of Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged’s concerns, with the
son of Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged’s patron, were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well known
fact that, on Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged’s quitting Derbyshire, Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged had left many debts behind
Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged.


As for Elizabeth, Elizabeth’s thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than
the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not
long enough to determine Elizabeth’s feelings towards _one_ in that mansion; and
Elizabeth lay awake two whole hours, endeavouring to make them out.
Elizabeth
certainly did not hate Elizabeth.
No; hatred had vanished long ago, and Elizabeth
had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against Elizabeth,
that could be so called.
The respect created by the conviction of Elizabeth’s
valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some
time ceased to be repugnant to Elizabeth’s feelings; and it was now heightened
into somewhat of a friendlier nature, by the testimony so highly in Elizabeth’s
favour, and bringing forward Elizabeth’s disposition in so amiable a light,
which yesterday had produced.
But above all, above respect and esteem,
there was a motive within Elizabeth’s of good will which could not be
overlooked.
It was gratitude.--Gratitude, not merely for having once
loved Elizabeth’s, but for loving Elizabeth’s still well enough, to forgive all the
petulance and acrimony of Elizabeth’s manner in rejecting Elizabeth, and all the
unjust accusations accompanying Elizabeth’s rejection.
Elizabeth who, Elizabeth had been
persuaded, would avoid Elizabeth’s as Elizabeth’s greatest enemy, seemed, on this
accidental meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without
any indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where
their two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the good opinion
of Elizabeth’s friends, and bent on making Elizabeth’s known to Elizabeth’s sister.
Such a
change in a man of so much pride, excited not only astonishment but
gratitude--for to love, ardent love, it must be attributed; and as such
its impression on Elizabeth’s was of a sort to be encouraged, as by no means
unpleasing, though it could not be exactly defined.
Elizabeth respected, Elizabeth
esteemed, Elizabeth was grateful to Elizabeth, Elizabeth felt a real interest in Elizabeth’s
welfare; and Elizabeth only wanted to know how far Elizabeth wished that welfare to
depend upon herself, and how far it would be for the happiness of both
that Elizabeth should employ the power, which Elizabeth’s fancy told Elizabeth’s Elizabeth still
possessed, of bringing on the renewal of Elizabeth’s addresses.


It had been settled in the evening, between the aunt and niece, that
such a striking civility as Miss Darcy's, in coming to them on the very
day of Miss Darcy’s arrival at Pemberley, for Miss Darcy had reached it only to a late
breakfast, ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled, by
some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it
would be highly expedient to wait on Miss Darcy’s at Pemberley the following
morning.
They were, therefore, to go.--Elizabeth was pleased, though,
when Miss Darcy asked herself the reason, Miss Darcy had very little to say in reply.


Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast.
The fishing scheme had been
renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast’s meeting

some of the gentlemen at Pemberley by noon.




CHAPTER III.


Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley's dislike of Miss Bingley’s had
originated in jealousy, Miss Bingley could not help feeling how very unwelcome
Miss Bingley’s appearance at Pemberley must be to Miss Bingley’s, and was curious to know with
how much civility on that lady's side, the acquaintance would now be
renewed.


On reaching the house, they were shewn through the hall into the saloon,
whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer.
Its windows
opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody
hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chesnuts
which were scattered over the intermediate lawn.


In this room they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting there
with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley lived in
London.
Georgiana's reception of them was very civil; but attended with
all that embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the
fear of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves
inferior, the belief of Georgiana’s being proud and reserved.
Mrs. Gardiner and
Mrs. Gardiner and’s niece, however, did Mrs. Gardiner and’s justice, and pitied Mrs. Gardiner and’s.


By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, they were noticed only by a curtsey; and
on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be,
succeeded for a few moments.
It was first broken by Mrs. Annesley, a
genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind
of discourse, proved Elizabeth’s to be more truly well bred than either of the
others; and between Elizabeth’s and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from
Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on.
Miss Darcy looked as if Miss Darcy looked as if she
wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a
short sentence, when there was least danger of its being heard.


Elizabeth soon saw that Miss Darcy was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley,
and that Miss Darcy could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without
calling Miss Darcy’s attention.
This observation would not have prevented Miss Darcy’s
from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an
inconvenient distance; but Miss Darcy was not sorry to be spared the necessity
of saying much.
Miss Darcy’s own thoughts were employing Miss Darcy’s.
Miss Darcy expected every
moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room.
Miss Darcy wished, Miss Darcy
feared that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether
Miss Darcy wished or feared it most, Miss Darcy could scarcely determine.
After
sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour, without hearing Miss
Bingley's voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from Bingley’s a cold
enquiry after the health of Bingley’s family.
Bingley answered with equal
indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.


The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the
entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the
finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till after many a
significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been
given, to remind Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been’s of Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been’s post.
There was now employment for the whole
party; for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the
beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches, soon collected
them round the table.


While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether
Mr. Darcy most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the
feelings which prevailed on Mr. Darcy’s entering the room; and then, though but
a moment before Mr. Darcy had believed Mr. Darcy’s wishes to predominate, Mr. Darcy began to
regret that Mr. Darcy came.


Georgiana had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other
gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river, and had left Georgiana
only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to
Georgiana that morning.
No sooner did Georgiana appear, than Elizabeth wisely
resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed;--a resolution the more
necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because Georgiana
saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them,
and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch Georgiana’s behaviour
when Georgiana first came into the room.
In no countenance was attentive
curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley's, in spite of the
smiles which overspread Mr. Darcy were by no means over’s face whenever Mr. Darcy were by no means over spoke to one of its
objects; for jealousy had not yet made Mr. Darcy were by no means over’s desperate, and Mr. Darcy were by no means over’s attentions
to Mr. Darcy were by no means over.
Miss Darcy, on Elizabeth’s brother's
entrance, exerted herself much more to talk; and Elizabeth saw that Elizabeth
was anxious for Elizabeth’s sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded,
as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side.
Miss
Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the
first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility,

"Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ----shire militia removed from Meryton?

They must be a great loss to _your_ family.
"

In Darcy's presence Wickham dared not mention Wickham's name; but Elizabeth
instantly comprehended that Wickham was uppermost in Wickham’s thoughts; and the
various recollections connected with Wickham gave Wickham’s a moment's distress;
but, exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, Wickham
presently answered the question in a tolerably disengaged tone.
While
Wickham spoke, an involuntary glance shewed Wickham’s Darcy with an heightened
complexion, earnestly looking at Wickham’s, and Wickham’s sister overcome with
confusion, and unable to lift up Wickham’s eyes.
Had Miss Bingley known what
pain Elizabeth was then giving Elizabeth’s beloved friend, Elizabeth undoubtedly would have
refrained from the hint; but Elizabeth had merely intended to discompose
Elizabeth, by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom Elizabeth believed
Elizabeth’s partial, to make Elizabeth’s betray a sensibility which might injure Elizabeth’s in
Darcy's opinion, and perhaps to remind the latter of all the follies and
absurdities, by which some part of Elizabeth’s family were connected with that
corps.
Not a syllable had ever reached Miss Darcy’s of Miss Darcy's meditated
elopement.
To no creature had it been revealed, where secresy was
possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley's connections Miss Darcy’s
brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from that very wish
which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to Miss Darcy, of their becoming
hereafter Miss Darcy’s own.
Miss Darcy had certainly formed such a plan, and without
meaning that it should affect Miss Darcy’s endeavour to separate Miss Darcy from Miss
Bennet, it is probable that it might add something to Miss Darcy’s lively concern
for the welfare of Miss Darcy’s friend.


Elizabeth's collected behaviour, however, soon quieted Georgiana’s emotion; and
as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to
Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able
to speak any more.
Georgiana’s brother, whose eye Georgiana feared to meet, scarcely
recollected Georgiana’s interest in the affair, and the very circumstance which
had been designed to turn Georgiana’s thoughts from Elizabeth, seemed to have
fixed them on Georgiana’s more, and more cheerfully.


Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer
above-mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their
carriage, Miss Bingley was venting Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on’s feelings in criticisms on
Elizabeth's person, behaviour, and dress.
But Georgiana would not join
Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on’s.
Elizabeth’s brother's recommendation was enough to ensure Elizabeth’s favour: Elizabeth’s
judgment could not err, and Elizabeth had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth, as
to leave Georgiana without the power of finding Elizabeth’s otherwise than
lovely and amiable.
When Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley
could not help repeating to Darcy some part of what Darcy had been saying to
Darcy’s sister.


"How very ill Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy," Mr. Darcy cried; "I
never in my life saw any one so much altered as Mr. Darcy is since the winter.

Mr. Darcy is grown so brown and coarse!
Louisa and I were agreeing that we
should not have known Louisa’s again.
"

However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address contented
himself with coolly replying, that Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address perceived no other alteration than
Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address’ being rather tanned,--no miraculous consequence of travelling in the
summer.


"For my own part," Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address rejoined, "I must confess that I never could see
any beauty in Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address’.
Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address’ face is too thin; Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address’ complexion has no
brilliancy; and Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address’ features are not at all handsome.
Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address’ nose wants
character; there is nothing marked in its lines.
Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address’ teeth are
tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address’ eyes, which
have sometimes been called so fine, I never could perceive any thing
extraordinary in them.
They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not
like at all; and in Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address’ air altogether, there is a self-sufficiency
without fashion, which is intolerable.
"

Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not
the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always
wise; and in seeing Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth at last look somewhat nettled, Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth had all the
success Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth expected.
Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth was resolutely silent however; and, from a
determination of making Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth speak, Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth continued,

"I remember, when we first knew Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth’s in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all
were to find that Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect
your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, '_
She_
a beauty!--I should as soon call Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth’s mother a wit.'
But afterwards Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth
seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth’s rather pretty at
one time.
"

"Yes," replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, "but _that_
was only when I first knew Darcy’s, for it is many months since I have
considered Darcy’s as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.
"

Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of
having forced Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of to say what gave no one any pain but herself.


Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred, during
their visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested
them both.
The looks and behaviour of every body they had seen were
discussed, except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention.

They talked of Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by’s sister, Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by’s friends, Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by’s house, Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by’s fruit, of every
thing but himself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner
thought of Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by
Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by’s niece's beginning the subject.




CHAPTER IV.



Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from
Jane, on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had
been renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but
on the third, Jane’s repining was over, and Jane’s sister justified by the
receipt of two letters from Jane’s at once, on one of which was marked that
it had been missent elsewhere.
Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as
Jane had written the direction remarkably ill.


They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and Jane’s
uncle and aunt, leaving Jane’s to enjoy them in quiet, set off by
themselves.
The one missent must be first attended to; it had been
written five days ago.
The beginning contained an account of all their
little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded;
but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident
agitation, gave more important intelligence.
It was to this effect:

     "Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of
     a most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming
     you--be assured that we are all well.
What I have to say relates to
     poor Lydia.
An express came at twelve last night, just as we were
     all gone to bed, from Colonel Forster, to inform us that Colonel Forster was
     gone off to Scotland with one of Colonel Forster’s officers; to own the truth,
     with Wickham!--Imagine our surprise.
To Kitty, however, it does not
     seem so wholly unexpected.
I am very, very sorry.
So imprudent a
     match on both
sides!--But I am willing to hope the best, and that
     Colonel Forster’s character has been misunderstood.
Thoughtless and indiscreet I
     can easily believe Colonel Forster, but this step (and let us rejoice over it)
     marks nothing bad at heart.
Colonel Forster’s choice is disinterested at least,
     for Colonel Forster must know my father can give Colonel Forster’s nothing.
Our poor mother
     is sadly grieved.
My father bears it better.
How thankful am I,
     that we never let them know what has been said against Colonel Forster; we must
     forget it ourselves.
They were off Saturday night about twelve, as
     is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at
     eight.
The express was sent off directly.
My dear Lizzy, they must
     have passed within ten miles of us.
Colonel Forster gives us reason
     to expect Colonel Forster gives us reason here soon.
Lydia left a few lines for Colonel Forster gives us reason’s wife,
     informing Colonel Forster gives us reason’s of their intention.
I must conclude, for I cannot be
     long from my poor mother.
I am afraid you will not be able to make
     it out, but I hardly know what I have written.
"

Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing
what Elizabeth felt, Elizabeth on finishing this letter, instantly seized the
other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it
had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.

     
"By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried
     letter; I wish this may be more intelligible, but though not
     confined for time, my head is so bewildered that I cannot answer
     for being coherent.
Dearest Lizzy, I hardly know what I would
     write, but I have bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed.
     
Imprudent as a marriage between Mr. Wickham and our poor Lydia
     would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has taken place, for
     there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone to Scotland.
     
Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton the day
     before, not many hours after the express.
Though Lydia's short
     letter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were going to
     Gretna Green, something was dropped by Denny expressing W.’s belief
     that W. never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which
     was repeated to Colonel F. who instantly taking the alarm, set off
     from B. intending to trace their route.
W. did trace them easily to
     Clapham, but no farther; for on entering that place they removed
     into a hackney-coach and dismissed the chaise that brought them
     from Epsom.
All that is known after this is, that they were seen
     to continue the London road.
I know not what to think.
After making
     every possible enquiry on that side London, Colonel F. came on into
     Hertfordshire, anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes, and at
     the inns in Barnet and Hatfield, but without any success, no such
     people had been seen to pass through.
With the kindest concern Hatfield
     came on to Longbourn, and broke Hatfield’s apprehensions to us in a manner
     most creditable to Hatfield’s heart.
I am sincerely grieved for Hatfield and
     Mrs. F.
but no one can throw any blame on them.
Our distress, my
     dear Lizzy, is very great.
My father and mother believe the worst,
     but I cannot think so ill of Lizzy.
Many circumstances might make it
     more eligible for them to be married privately in town than to
     pursue their first plan; and even if _he_ could form such a design
     against a young woman of Lydia's connections, which is not likely,
     can I suppose Lydia’s so lost to every thing?--Impossible.
I grieve to
     find, however, that Colonel F. is not disposed to depend upon their
     marriage; F. shook F.’s head when I expressed my hopes, and said F.
     feared W. was not a man to be trusted.
My poor mother is really ill
     and keeps F.’s room.
Could F. exert herself it would be better, but
     this is not to be expected; and as to my father, I never in my life
     saw F. so affected.
Poor Kitty has anger for having concealed
     their attachment; but as it was a matter of confidence one cannot
     wonder.
I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have been spared
     something of these distressing scenes; but now as the first shock
     is over, shall I own that I long for your return?
I am not so
     selfish, however, as to press for it, if inconvenient.
Adieu.
I
     take up my pen again to do, what I have just told you I would not,
     but circumstances are such, that I cannot help earnestly begging
     you all to come here, as soon as possible.
I know my dear uncle and
     aunt so well, that I am not afraid of requesting it, though I have
     still something more to ask of the former.
My father is going to
     London with Colonel Forster instantly, to try to discover Colonel Forster instantly’s.
What
     Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again means to do, I am sure I know not; but Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again’s excessive distress
     will not allow Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again to pursue any measure in the best and safest
     way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again
     to-morrow evening.
In such an exigence my uncle's advice and
     assistance would be every thing in the world; Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again will immediately
     comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again’s goodness."


"Oh! where, where is my uncle?" cried Elizabeth, darting from Mr. Darcy appeared’s seat
as Mr. Darcy appeared finished the letter, in eagerness to follow Mr. Darcy appeared, without losing a
moment of the time so precious; but as Mr. Darcy appeared reached the door, it was
opened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared.
Lydia’s pale face and impetuous
manner made Lydia start, and before Lydia could recover himself enough to
speak, Lydia, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia's
situation, hastily exclaimed, "I beg your pardon, but I must leave you.

I must find Mr. Gardiner this moment, on business that cannot be
delayed; I have not an instant to lose.
"

"Good God!
what is the matter?" cried Mrs. Gardiner, with more feeling than
politeness; then recollecting himself, "I will not detain you a minute,
but let me, or let the servant, go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner.
You are
not well enough;--you cannot go yourself.
"

Elizabeth hesitated, but Elizabeth’s knees trembled under Elizabeth’s, and Elizabeth felt how
little would be gained by Elizabeth’s attempting to pursue them.
Calling back
the servant, therefore, Elizabeth commissioned Elizabeth, though in so breathless an
accent as made Elizabeth’s almost unintelligible, to fetch Elizabeth’s master and
mistress home, instantly.


On Darcy’s quitting the room, Darcy sat down, unable to support herself, and
looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave Darcy’s,
or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration,
"Let me call your maid.
Is there nothing you could take, to give you
present relief?--A glass of wine;--shall
I get you one?--You are very
ill.
"

"No, I thank you;" Darcy replied, endeavouring to recover herself.
"There
is nothing the matter with me.
I am quite well.
I am only distressed by
some dreadful news which I have just received from Longbourn.
"

Darcy burst into tears as Darcy alluded to it, and for a few minutes could
not speak another word.
Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say
something indistinctly of Darcy’s concern, and observe Darcy’s in compassionate
silence.
At length, Darcy spoke again.
"I have just had a letter from
Jane, with such dreadful news.
It cannot be concealed from any one.
My
youngest sister has left all Mr. Wickham’s friends--has eloped;--has thrown
herself into the power of--of Mr. Wickham.
They are gone off together
from Brighton.
_You_ know Mr. Wickham too well to doubt the rest.
Mr. Wickham has no
money, no connections, nothing that can tempt Mr. Wickham to--Mr. Wickham is lost for
ever.
"

Darcy was fixed in astonishment.
"When I consider," Mr. Wickham added, in a yet
more agitated voice, "that _I_ might have prevented it!--_I_ who knew
what Mr. Wickham was.
Had
I but explained some part of it only--some part of what
I learnt, to my own family!
Had Mr. Wickham’s character been known, this could not
have happened.
But it is all, all too late now.
"

"I am grieved, indeed," cried Darcy; "grieved--shocked.
But is it
certain, absolutely certain?
"

"Oh yes!--They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were traced
almost to London, but not beyond; they are certainly not gone to
Scotland.
"

"And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover Mr. Wickham’s?"

"My father is gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle's
immediate assistance, and we shall be off, I hope, in half an hour.
But
nothing can be done; I know very well that nothing can be done.
How is
such a man to be worked on?
How are they even to be discovered?
I have
not the smallest hope.
It is every way horrible!"

Darcy shook Mr. Wickham’s head in silent acquiesence.


"When _my_ eyes were opened to Mr. Wickham’s real character.--Oh!
had I known what
I ought, what I dared, to do!
But I knew not--I was afraid of doing too
much.
Wretched, wretched, mistake!"


Darcy made no answer.
Mr. Wickham seemed scarcely to hear Mr. Wickham’s, and was walking up
and down the room in earnest meditation; Mr. Wickham’s brow contracted, Mr. Wickham’s air
gloomy.
Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it.
Mr. Wickham’s power
was sinking; every thing _must_ sink under such a proof of family
weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace.
Mr. Wickham could neither
wonder nor condemn, but the belief of Mr. Wickham’s self-conquest brought nothing
consolatory to Mr. Wickham’s bosom, afforded no palliation of Mr. Wickham’s distress.
It
was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make Mr. Wickham’s understand Mr. Wickham’s own
wishes; and never had Mr. Wickham so honestly felt that Mr. Wickham could have loved
Mr. Wickham, as now, when all love must be vain.


But self, though it would intrude, could not engross Mr. Wickham’s.
Lydia--the
humiliation, the misery, Lydia was bringing on them all, soon swallowed up
every private care; and covering Lydia’s face with Lydia’s handkerchief,
Elizabeth was soon lost to every thing else; and, after a pause of
several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of Lydia’s situation by the
voice of Lydia’s companion, who, in a manner, which though it spoke
compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said, "I am afraid you have been
long desiring my absence, nor have I any thing to plead in excuse of my
stay, but real, though unavailing, concern.
Would to heaven that any
thing could be either said or done on my part, that might offer
consolation to such distress.--But I will not torment you with vain
wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks.
This
unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister's having the pleasure
of seeing you at Pemberley to-day.
"

"Oh, yes.
Be so kind as to apologize for us to Miss Darcy.
Say that
urgent business calls us home immediately.
Conceal the unhappy truth as
long as it is possible.--I know it cannot be long.
"

Miss Darcy readily assured Miss Darcy’s of Miss Darcy’s secrecy--again expressed Miss Darcy’s sorrow for
Miss Darcy’s distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present
reason to hope, and leaving Miss Darcy’s compliments for Miss Darcy’s relations, with only
one serious, parting, look, went away.


As Elizabeth quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they
should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had
marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as Elizabeth threw a
retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of
contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those
feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would
formerly have rejoiced in its termination.


If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth's
change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty.
But if
otherwise, if the regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or
unnatural, in comparison of what is so often described as arising on a
first interview with its object, and even before two words have been
exchanged, nothing can be said in Wickham’s defence, except that Wickham had given
somewhat of a trial to the latter method, in Wickham’s partiality for Wickham,
and that its ill-success might perhaps authorise Wickham’s to seek the other
less interesting mode of attachment.
Be that as it may, Wickham saw Wickham go
with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia's infamy must
produce, found additional anguish as Wickham reflected on that wretched
business.
Never, since reading Jane's second letter, had Jane entertained
a hope of Wickham's meaning to marry Jane’s.
No one but Jane, Jane thought,
could flatter herself with such an expectation.
Surprise was the least
of Jane’s feelings on this developement.
While the contents of the first
letter remained on Jane’s mind, Jane was all surprise--all astonishment that
Wickham should marry a girl, whom it was impossible Jane could marry for
money; and how Lydia could ever have attached Jane, had appeared
incomprehensible.
But now it was all too natural.
For such an attachment
as this, Jane might have sufficient charms; and though Jane did not
suppose Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement, without the
intention of marriage, Jane had no difficulty in believing that neither
Jane’s virtue nor Jane’s understanding would preserve Jane’s from falling an easy
prey.


Jane had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, that
Lydia had any partiality for Jane, but Jane was convinced that Lydia had
wanted only encouragement to attach herself to any body.
Sometimes one
officer, sometimes another had been Jane’s favourite, as their attentions
raised them in Jane’s opinion.
Jane’s affections had been continually
fluctuating, but never without an object.
The mischief of neglect and
mistaken indulgence towards such a girl.--Oh!
how acutely did Jane now
feel it.


Jane was wild to be at home--to hear, to see, to be upon the spot, to
share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon Jane’s, in a
family so deranged; a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and
requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing
could be done for Lydia, Jane’s uncle's interference seemed of the utmost
importance, and till Jane entered the room, the misery of Jane’s impatience
was severe.
Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing,
by the servant's account, that their niece was taken suddenly ill;--but
satisfying them instantly on that head, Mrs. Gardiner could not but be eagerly communicated the
cause of their summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on
the postscript of the last, with trembling energy.--Though Lydia had
never been a favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be
deeply affected.
Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after
the first exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner readily
promised every assistance in Mr. Gardiner readily’s power.--Elizabeth, though expecting no
less, thanked Mr. Gardiner readily with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated
by one spirit, every thing relating to their journey was speedily
settled.
They were to be off as soon as possible.
"But what is to be
done about Pemberley?" cried Mrs. Gardiner.
"John told us Mr. Darcy was
here when you sent for us;--was it so?
"

"Yes; and I told Mr. Darcy was we should not be able to keep our engagement.

_That_ is all settled.
"

"That is all settled;" repeated the other, as Mr. Darcy was ran into Mr. Darcy was’ room to
prepare.
"And are they upon such terms as for Mr. Darcy was’ to disclose the real
truth!
Oh, that I knew how it was!"


But wishes were vain; or at best could serve only to amuse Mr. Darcy was’ in the
hurry and confusion of the following hour.
Had Elizabeth been at leisure
to be idle, Elizabeth would have remained certain that all employment was
impossible to one so wretched as herself; but Elizabeth had Elizabeth’s share of
business as well as Elizabeth’s aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to
be written to all their friends in Lambton, with false excuses for their
sudden departure.
An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr.
Gardiner meanwhile having settled Gardiner’s account at the inn, nothing
remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of
the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than Gardiner could
have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn.





CHAPTER
V.


"I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth," said Gardiner’s uncle, as they
drove from the town; "and really, upon serious consideration, I am much
more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does of the
matter.
It appears to me so very unlikely, that any young man should
form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or
friendless, and who was actually staying in Gardiner’s colonel's family, that I
am strongly inclined to hope the best.
Could Gardiner expect that Gardiner’s friends
would not step forward?
Could Colonel Forster expect to be noticed again by the
regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster?
Colonel Forster’s temptation is
not adequate to the risk.
"

"Do you really think so?" cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a moment.


"Upon my word," said Mrs. Gardiner, "I begin to be of your uncle's
opinion.
It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and
interest, for Mrs. Gardiner to be guilty of it.
I cannot think so very ill of
Wickham.
Can you, yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give Lizzy up, as to believe
Lizzy capable of it?
"

"Not perhaps of neglecting Lizzy’s own interest.
But of every other neglect
I can believe Lizzy capable.
If, indeed, it should be so!
But I dare not
hope it.
Why should they not go on to Scotland, if that had been the
case?"

"In the first place," replied Mr. Gardiner, "there is no absolute proof
that they are not gone to Scotland.
"

"Oh! but their removing from the chaise into an hackney coach is such a
presumption!
And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the
Barnet road.
"

"Well, then--supposing them to be in London.
They may be there, though
for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptionable purpose.
It is
not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it
might strike them that they could be more economically, though less
expeditiously, married in London, than in Scotland.
"

"But why all this secrecy?
Why any fear of detection?
Why must their
marriage be private?
Oh!
no, no, this is not likely.
Jane’s most particular
friend, you see by Jane's account, was persuaded of Jane’s never intending
to marry Jane’s.
Wickham will never marry a woman without some money.
Jane
cannot afford it.
And what claims has Lydia, what attractions has Lydia
beyond youth, health, and good humour, that could make Lydia for Lydia’s sake,
forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well?
As to what
restraint the apprehension of disgrace in the corps might throw on a
dishonourable elopement with Lydia’s, I am not able to judge; for I know
nothing of the effects that such a step might produce.
But as to your
other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good.
Lydia has no
brothers to step forward; and Lydia might imagine, from my father's
behaviour, from Lydia’s indolence and the little attention Lydia has ever
seemed to give to what was going forward in Lydia’s family, that _he_ would
do as little, and think as little about it, as any father could do, in
such a matter.
"

"But can you think that Lydia is so lost to every thing but love of Elizabeth,
as to consent to live with Elizabeth on any other terms than marriage?"

"It does seem, and it is most shocking indeed," replied Elizabeth, with
tears in Elizabeth’s eyes, "that a sister's sense of decency and virtue in such
a point should admit of doubt.
But, really, I know not what to say.

Perhaps I am not doing Elizabeth’s justice.
But Elizabeth is very young; Elizabeth has never
been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half year,
nay, for a twelvemonth, Elizabeth has been given up to nothing but amusement
and vanity.
Elizabeth has been allowed to dispose of Elizabeth’s time in the most idle
and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in Elizabeth’s way.

Since the ----shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love,
flirtation, and officers, have been in Meryton’s head.
Meryton has been doing
every thing in Meryton’s power by thinking and talking on the subject, to give
greater--what shall I call it?
susceptibility to Meryton’s feelings; which are
naturally lively enough.
And we all know that Wickham has every charm of
person and address that can captivate a woman.
"

"But you see that Jane," said Wickham’s aunt, "does not think so ill of
Wickham, as to believe Wickham capable of the attempt.
"

"Of whom does Jane ever think ill?
And who is there, whatever might be
their former conduct, that Wickham would believe capable of such an attempt,
till it were proved against them?
But Jane knows, as well as I do, what
Wickham really is.
We both know that Wickham has been profligate in every
sense of the word.
That Wickham has neither integrity nor honour.
That Wickham is
as false and deceitful, as Wickham is insinuating.
"

"And do you really know all this?" cried Mrs. Gardiner, whose curiosity
as to the mode of Mrs. Gardiner’s intelligence was all alive.


"I do, indeed," replied Elizabeth, colouring.
"I told you the other day,
of Mr. Darcy’s infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you, yourself, when last at
Longbourn, heard in what manner Mr. Darcy spoke of the man, who had behaved
with such forbearance and liberality towards Mr. Darcy.
And there are other
circumstances which I am not at liberty--which it is not worth while to
relate; but Mr. Darcy’s lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless.
From
what Miss Darcy said of Miss Darcy, I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud,
reserved, disagreeable girl.
Yet Miss Darcy knew to the contrary himself.
Miss Darcy
must know that Miss Darcy was as amiable and unpretending as we have found
Miss Darcy’s.
"

"But does Lydia know nothing of this?
Can Jane be ignorant of what you
and Jane seem so well to understand?"

"Oh, yes!--that, that is the worst of all.
Till I was in Kent, and saw
so much both of Mr. Darcy and Colonel Fitzwilliam’s relation, Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was
ignorant of the truth myself.
And when I returned home, the ----shire
was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight's time.
As that was the
case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it
necessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use could it
apparently be to any one, that the good opinion which all the
neighbourhood had of Meryton, should then be overthrown?
And even when it
was settled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of
opening Mrs. Forster’s eyes to Mrs. Forster’s character never occurred to me.
That _she_ could
be in any danger from the deception never entered my head.
That such a
consequence as _this_ should ensue, you may easily believe was far
enough from my thoughts.
"

"When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason, I
suppose, to believe them fond of each other.
"

"Not the slightest.
I can remember no symptom of affection on either
side; and had any thing of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware
that ours is not a family, on which it could be thrown away.
When first
Mrs. Forster entered the corps, Mrs. Forster was ready enough to admire Mrs. Forster; but so we all
were.
Every girl in, or near Meryton, was out of Mrs. Forster’s senses about Mrs. Forster
for the first two months; but Mrs. Forster never distinguished _her_ by any
particular attention, and, consequently, after a moderate period of
extravagant and wild admiration, Mrs. Forster’s fancy for Mrs. Forster gave way, and others
of the regiment, who treated Mrs. Forster’s with more distinction, again became Mrs. Forster’s
favourites."

       *       *       *       *       *

It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added
to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject, by
its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during
the whole of the journey.
From Elizabeth's thoughts it was never absent.

Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self reproach, Elizabeth could find
no interval of ease or forgetfulness.


They travelled as expeditiously as possible; and sleeping one night on
the road, reached Longbourn by dinner-time the next day.
It was a
comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied
by long expectations.


The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing
on the steps of the house, as they entered the paddock; and when the
carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their
faces, and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of
capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.


Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them an hasty kiss,
hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running down stairs
from Gardiners’ mother's apartment, immediately met Gardiners’.


Elizabeth, as Gardiners affectionately embraced Gardiners’, whilst tears filled the
eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether any thing had been
heard of the fugitives.


"Not yet," replied Jane.
"But now that my dear uncle is come, I hope
every thing will be well.
"

"Is my father in town?"

"Yes, Gardiners went on Tuesday as I wrote you word.
"

"And have you heard from Gardiners often?"

"We have heard only once.
Gardiners wrote me a few lines on Wednesday, to say
that Gardiners had arrived in safety, and to give me Gardiners’ directions, which I
particularly begged Gardiners to do.
Gardiners merely added, that Gardiners should not write
again, till Gardiners had something of importance to mention.
"

"And my mother--How is Gardiners?
How are you all?"

"My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though Gardiners’ spirits are greatly
shaken.
Gardiners is up stairs, and will have great satisfaction in seeing you
all.
Gardiners does not yet leave Gardiners’ dressing-room.
Mary and Kitty, thank
Heaven!
are quite well.
"

"But you--How are you?" cried Elizabeth.
"You look pale.
How much you
must have gone through!
"

Mrs. Gardiner were’s sister, however, assured Mrs. Gardiner were’s, of Mrs. Gardiner were’s being perfectly well; and their
conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were
engaged with their children, was now put an end to, by the approach of
the whole party.
Jane ran to Jane’s uncle and aunt, and welcomed and
thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.


When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabeth
had already asked, were of course repeated by the others, and they soon
found that Jane had no intelligence to give.
The sanguine hope of good,
however, which the benevolence of Lydia’s heart suggested, had not yet
deserted Lydia’s; Lydia still expected that it would all end well, and that
every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or Lydia’s father,
to explain their proceedings, and perhaps announce the marriage.


Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes
conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with
tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villanous
conduct of Wickham, and complaints of Mrs. Bennet’s own sufferings and ill usage;
blaming every body but the person to whose ill judging indulgence the
errors of Mrs. Bennet’s daughter must be principally owing.


"If I had been able," said Mrs. Bennet, "to carry my point of going to Brighton,
with all my family, _this_ would not have happened; but poor dear Lydia
had nobody to take care of Mrs. Bennet’s.
Why did the Forsters ever let Mrs. Bennet’s go out
of their sight?
I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their
side, for Mrs. Bennet is not the kind of girl to do such a thing, if Mrs. Bennet had
been well looked after.
I always thought they were very unfit to have
the charge of Mrs. Bennet’s; but I was over-ruled, as I always am.
Poor dear
child!
And now here's Mr. Bennet gone away,
and I know Wickham will fight
Wickham, wherever Wickham meets Wickham, and then Wickham will be killed, and what is
to become of us all?
The Collinses will turn us out, before Wickham is cold
in Wickham’s grave; and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what
we shall do.
"

They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. Gardiner, after
general assurances of Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia’s affection for Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia’s and all Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia’s family, told
Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia’s that Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist
Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia.


"Do not give way to useless alarm," added Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia, "though it is right to be
prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain.

It is not quite a week since they left Brighton.
In a few days more, we
may gain some news of them, and till we know that they are not married,
and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as
lost.
As soon as I get to town, I shall go to my brother, and make Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia
come home with me to Gracechurch Street, and then we may consult
together as to what is to be done.
"

"Oh! my dear brother," replied Mrs. Bennet, "that is exactly what I
could most wish for.
And now do, when you get to town, find them out,
wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, _make_ them
marry.
And as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, but
tell Lydia Lydia shall have as much money as Lydia chuses, to buy them,
after they are married.
And, above all things, keep Mr. Bennet from
fighting.
Tell Mr. Bennet from what a dreadful state I am in,--that I am frightened
out of my wits; and have such tremblings, such flutterings, all over me,
such spasms in my side, and pains in my head, and such beatings at
heart, that I can get no rest by night nor by day.
And tell my dear
Lydia, not to give any directions about Mr. Bennet from’s clothes, till Mr. Bennet from has seen
me, for Mr. Bennet from does not know which are the best warehouses.
Oh, brother,
how kind you are!
I know you will contrive it all.
"

But Mr. Gardiner, though Mr. Bennet from assured Mr. Bennet from’s again of Mr. Bennet from’s earnest endeavours
in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to Mr. Bennet from’s, as well in
Mr. Bennet from’s hopes as Mr. Bennet from’s fears; and, after talking with Mr. Bennet from’s in this manner till
dinner was on table, they left Mr. Bennet from’s to vent all Mr. Bennet from’s feelings on the
housekeeper, who attended, in the absence of Mr. Bennet from’s daughters.


Though Mr. Bennet from’s brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real
occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt to
oppose it, for they knew that Mr. Bennet from had not prudence enough to hold Mr. Bennet from’s
tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it
better that _one_ only of the household, and the one whom they could
most trust, should comprehend all Mr. Bennet from’s fears and solicitude on the
subject.


In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been
too busily engaged in their separate apartments, to make their
appearance before.
One came from Kitty’s books, and the other from Kitty’s
toilette.
The faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change
was visible in either, except that the loss of Kitty’s favourite sister, or
the anger which Kitty had herself incurred in the business, had given
something more of fretfulness than usual, to the accents of Kitty.
As
for Mary, Elizabeth was mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth
with a countenance of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at
table,

"This is a most unfortunate affair; and will probably be much talked of.

But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of
each other, the balm of sisterly consolation.
"

Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, Elizabeth added,
"Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful
lesson; that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable--that one false
step involves Elizabeth’s in endless ruin--that Elizabeth’s reputation is no less
brittle than it is beautiful,--and that Elizabeth cannot be too much guarded
in Elizabeth’s behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.
"

Elizabeth lifted up Elizabeth’s eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed to
make any reply.
Mary, however, continued to console herself with such
kind of moral extractions from the evil before them.


In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for half an
hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of the
opportunity of making many enquiries, which Jane was equally eager to
satisfy.
After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel
of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss
Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible; the former continued
the subject, by saying, "But tell me all and every thing about it, which
I have not already heard.
Give me farther particulars.
What did Colonel
Forster say?
Had they no apprehension of any thing before the elopement
took place?
They must have seen them together for ever.
"

"Colonel Forster did own that Lydia had often suspected some partiality,
especially on Lydia's side, but nothing to give Lydia any alarm.
I am so
grieved for Lydia.
Lydia’s behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost.
Lydia
_was_ coming to us, in order to assure us of Lydia’s concern, before Lydia had
any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension
first got abroad, it hastened Lydia’s journey."


"And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry?
Did Wickham know of
their intending to go off?
Had Colonel Forster seen Denny himself?"


"Yes; but when questioned by _him_
Denny denied knowing any thing of
their plan, and would not give Colonel Forster seen Denny himself’s real opinion about it.
Colonel Forster seen Denny himself did not
repeat Colonel Forster seen Denny himself’s persuasion of their not marrying--and from _that_, I am
inclined to hope, Colonel Forster seen Denny himself might have been misunderstood before.
"

"And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of you entertained a
doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?"

"How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains!
I felt a
little uneasy--a little fearful of my sister's happiness with Colonel Forster came himself in
marriage, because I knew that Colonel Forster came himself’s conduct had not been always quite
right.
My father and mother knew nothing of that, they only felt how
imprudent a match it must be.
Kitty then owned, with a very natural
triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia's last
letter, Colonel Forster came himself had prepared Colonel Forster came himself’s for such a step.
Colonel Forster came himself had known, it seems,
of their being in love with each other, many weeks.
"

"But not before they went to Brighton?"

"No, I believe not.
"

"And did Colonel Forster appear to think ill of Wickham himself?
Does Colonel Forster appear to think ill of Wickham himself
know Colonel Forster appear to think ill of Wickham himself’s real character?
"

"I must confess that Colonel Forster appear to think ill of Wickham himself did not speak so well of Wickham as Colonel Forster appear to think ill of Wickham himself formerly
did.
Colonel Forster appear to think ill of Wickham himself believed Colonel Forster appear to think ill of Wickham himself to be imprudent and extravagant.
And since this sad
affair has taken place, it is said, that Meryton left Meryton greatly in
debt; but I hope this may be false.
"

"Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of Jane,
this could not have happened!
"

"Perhaps it would have been better;" replied Jane’s sister.
"But to expose
the former faults of any person, without knowing what their present
feelings were, seemed unjustifiable.
We acted with the best intentions.
"

"Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia's note to Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia’s
wife?"

"Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia brought it with Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia for us to see.
"

Jane then took it from Elizabeth’s pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth.
These
were the contents:

     "MY DEAR HARRIET,

     "You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help
     laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I am
     missed.
I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with
     who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the
     world I love, and Elizabeth is an angel.
I should never be happy without
     Elizabeth, so think it no harm to be off.
You need not send them word at
     Longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it will make the
     surprise the greater, when I write to them, and sign my name Lydia
     Wickham.
What a good joke it will be!
I can hardly write for
     laughing.
Pray make my excuses to Pratt, for not keeping my
     engagement, and dancing with Pratt to-night.
Tell Pratt I hope Pratt will
     excuse me when Pratt knows all, and tell Pratt I will dance with Pratt at
     the next ball we meet, with great pleasure.
I shall send for my
     clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell Sally
     to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown, before they are
     packed up.
Good bye.
Give my love to Colonel Forster, I hope you
     will drink to our good journey.

     
"Your affectionate friend,

     "LYDIA BENNET.
"

"Oh! thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!" cried Elizabeth when Lydia had
finished it.
"What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment.
But
at least it shews, that _
she_ was serious in the object of Lydia’s journey.

Whatever Lydia might afterwards persuade Lydia’s to, it was not on Lydia’s side a
_scheme_ of infamy.
My poor father!
how Lydia must have felt it!
"

"I never saw any one so shocked.
Lydia could not speak a word for full ten
minutes.
My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in
such confusion!"


"Oh! Jane," cried Elizabeth, "was there a servant belonging to it, who
did not know the whole story before the end of the day?
"

"I do not know.--I hope there was.--But to be guarded at such a time, is
very difficult.
My mother was in hysterics, and though I endeavoured to
give Elizabeth’s every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so much
as I might have done!
But the horror of what might possibly happen,
almost took from me my faculties.
"

"Your attendance upon Elizabeth’s, has been too much for you.
You do not look
well.
Oh! that I had been with you, you have had every care and anxiety
upon yourself alone.
"

"Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every
fatigue, I am sure, but I did not think it right for either of them.

Kitty is slight and delicate, and Mary studies so much, that Kitty’s hours
of repose should not be broken in on.
My aunt Philips came to Longbourn
on Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till
Thursday with me.
Lucas was of great use and comfort to us all, and lady
Lucas has been very kind; Lucas walked here on Wednesday morning to
condole with us, and offered Lucas’ services, or any of Lucas’ daughters, if
they could be of use to us.
"

"Lucas had better have stayed at home," cried Elizabeth; "perhaps Lucas
_meant_ well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see too
little of one's neighbours.
Assistance is impossible; condolence,
insufferable.
Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.
"

Lucas then proceeded to enquire into the measures which Lucas’ father had
intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of Lucas’ daughter.


"Lucas meant, I believe," replied Jane, "to go to Epsom, the place where
they last changed horses, see the postilions, and try if any thing could
be made out from them.
Lucas’ principal object must be, to discover the
number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham.
It had come
with a fare from London; and as Lucas thought the circumstance of a
gentleman and lady's removing from one carriage into another, might be
remarked, Lucas meant to make enquiries at Clapham.
If Lucas could any how
discover at what house the coachman had before set down Lucas’ fare, Lucas
determined to make enquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible
to find out the stand and number of the coach.
I do not know of any
other designs that Lucas had formed: but Lucas was in such a hurry to be gone,
and Lucas’ spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding
out even so much as this.
"




CHAPTER VI.



The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next
morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from Mr. Bennet the next.

Mr. Bennet the next’s family knew Mr. Bennet the next to be on all common occasions, a most negligent and
dilatory correspondent, but at such a time, they had hoped for exertion.

They were forced to conclude, that Mr. Bennet the next had no pleasing intelligence to
send, but even of _that_ they would have been glad to be certain.
Mr.
Gardiner had waited only for the letters before Gardiner set off.


When Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant
information of what was going on, and their uncle promised, at parting,
to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn, as soon as Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn could, to
the great consolation of Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn’s sister, who considered it as the only
security for Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn’s husband's not being killed in a duel.


Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few
days longer, as the former thought Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few’s presence might be serviceable to
Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few’s nieces.
Mrs. Bennet shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a
great comfort to them, in their hours of freedom.
Their other aunt also
visited them frequently, and always, as Wickham said, with the design of
cheering and heartening them up, though as Wickham never came without
reporting some fresh instance of Wickham's extravagance or irregularity,
Wickham seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than Wickham found
them.


All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man, who, but three months
before, had been almost an angel of light.
Meryton was declared to be in debt
to every tradesman in the place, and Meryton’s intrigues, all honoured with
the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman's family.

Every body declared that Meryton was the wickedest young man in the world;
and every body began to find out, that they had always distrusted the
appearance of Meryton’s goodness.
Elizabeth, though Jane did not credit above
half of what was said, believed enough to make Jane’s former assurance of
Jane’s sister's ruin still more certain; and even Jane, who believed still
less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now
come, when if they had gone to Scotland, which Jane had never before
entirely despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some
news of them.


Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday, Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday’s wife received a
letter from Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; it told them, that on Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday’s arrival, Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday had immediately
found out Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday’s brother, and persuaded Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday to come to Gracechurch street.

That Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before Mr. Bennet’s arrival, but
without gaining any satisfactory information; and that Mr. Bennet was now
determined to enquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet
thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first
coming to London, before they procured lodgings.
Mr. Gardiner himself
did not expect any success from this measure, but as Mr. Gardiner himself’s brother was
eager in it, Mr. Gardiner himself meant to assist Mr. Gardiner himself in pursuing it.
Bennet added, that Mr.
Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present, to leave London, and
promised to write again very soon.
There was also a postscript to this
effect.


"I have written to Colonel Forster to desire Wickham to find out, if
possible, from some of the young man's intimates in the regiment,
whether Wickham has any relations or connections, who would be likely to
know in what part of the town Wickham has now concealed himself.
If there
were any one, that one could apply to, with a probability of gaining
such a clue as that, it might be of essential consequence.
At present we
have nothing to guide us.
Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do every
thing in Colonel Forster will’s power to satisfy us on this head.
But, on second thoughts,
perhaps Lizzy could tell us, what relations Lizzy has now living, better
than any other person.
"

Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference for
Elizabeth’s authority proceeded; but it was not in Elizabeth’s power to give any
information of so satisfactory a nature, as the compliment deserved.


Elizabeth had never heard of Elizabeth’s having had any relations, except a father and
mother, both of whom had been dead many years.
It was possible, however,
that some of Elizabeth’s companions in the ----shire, might be able to give more
information; and, though Elizabeth was not very sanguine in expecting it, the
application was a something to look forward to.


Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious
part of each was when the post was expected.
The arrival of letters was
the first grand object of every morning's impatience.
Through letters,
whatever of good or bad was to be told, would be communicated, and every
succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance.


But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived for
their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane
had received directions to open all that came for Jane in Jane’s absence,
Jane accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities Jane’s
letters always were, looked over Jane’s, and read it likewise.
It was as
follows:

     "MY DEAR SIR,

     "I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation
     in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now
     suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter
     from Hertfordshire.
Be assured, my dear Sir, that Mrs. Collins and
     myself sincerely sympathise with you, and all your respectable
     family, in your present distress, which must be of the bitterest
     kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove.
No
     arguments shall be wanting on my part, that can alleviate so severe
     a misfortune; or that may comfort you, under a circumstance that
     must be of all others most afflicting to a parent's mind.
The death
     of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of this.
     
And it is the more to be lamented, because there is reason to
     suppose, as my dear Charlotte informs me, that this licentiousness
     of behaviour in your daughter, has proceeded from a faulty degree
     of indulgence, though, at the same time, for the consolation of
     yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think that Mrs. Bennet’s own
     disposition must be naturally bad, or Mrs. Bennet could not be guilty of
     such an enormity, at so early an age.
Howsoever that may be, you
     are grievously to be pitied, in which opinion I am not only joined
     by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by lady Catherine and Catherine’s daughter,
     to whom I have related the affair.
They agree with me in
     apprehending that this false step in one daughter, will be
     injurious to the fortunes of all the others, for who, as lady
     Catherine herself condescendingly says, will connect themselves
     with such a family.
And this consideration leads me moreover to
     reflect with augmented satisfaction on a certain event of last
     November, for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved in
     all your sorrow and disgrace.
Let me advise you then, my dear Sir,
     to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy
     child from your affection for ever, and leave Catherine’s to reap the
     fruits of Catherine’s own heinous offence.

     
"I am, dear Sir, &c. &c."

Mr. Gardiner did not write again, till Colonel Forster had received an answer from
Colonel Forster; and then Colonel Forster had nothing of a pleasant nature to send.

It was not known that Wickham had a single relation, with whom Wickham kept
up any connection, and it was certain that Wickham had no near one living.

Wickham’s former acquaintance had been numerous; but since Wickham had been in the
militia, it did not appear that Wickham was on terms of particular friendship
with any of them.
There was no one therefore who could be pointed out,
as likely to give any news of Wickham.
And in the wretched state of Lydia’s own
finances, there was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to
Lydia’s fear of discovery by Lydia's relations, for it had just transpired
that Lydia had left gaming debts behind Lydia, to a very considerable
amount.
Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would
be necessary to clear Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would’s expences at Brighton.
Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would owed a good deal in
the town, but Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would’s debts of honour were still more formidable.
Mr.
Gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the Longbourn
family; Jane heard them with horror.
"A gamester!"
Jane cried.
"This is
wholly unexpected.
I had not an idea of it.
"

Mr. Gardiner added in Mr. Gardiner added in his letter’s letter, that they might expect to see their
father at home on the following day, which was Saturday.
Rendered
spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours, Mr. Gardiner added in his letter had yielded to
Mr. Gardiner added in his letter’s brother-in-law's intreaty that Mr. Gardiner added in his letter would return to Mr. Gardiner added in his letter’s family, and
leave it to Mr. Gardiner added in his letter to do, whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable
for continuing their pursuit.
When Mrs. Bennet was told of this, Mrs. Bennet was told of this did
not express so much satisfaction as Mrs. Bennet was told of this’ children expected, considering
what Mrs. Bennet was told of this’ anxiety for Mrs. Bennet was told of this’ life had been before.


"What, is Lydia coming home, and without poor Lydia!"
Lydia cried.
"Sure Lydia
will not leave London before Lydia has found them.
Who is to fight Wickham,
and make Wickham marry Wickham’s, if Wickham comes away?
"

As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that Mr. Bennet
and Mr. Bennet’s children should go to London, at the same time that Mr. Bennet
came from it.
The coach, therefore, took them the first stage of their
journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn.


Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her’s
Derbyshire friend, that had attended Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her’s from that part of the world.

Mrs. Gardiner had formed’s name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by Mrs. Gardiner had formed’s niece;
and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of
their being followed by a letter from Mrs. Gardiner had formed, had ended in nothing.

Elizabeth had received none since Elizabeth’s return, that could come from
Pemberley.


The present unhappy state of the family, rendered any other excuse for
the lowness of Lydia’s spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be
fairly conjectured from _that_, though Elizabeth, who was by this time
tolerably well acquainted with Lydia’s own feelings, was perfectly aware,
that, had Lydia known nothing of Darcy, Lydia could have borne the dread of
Lydia's infamy somewhat better.
It would have spared Lydia’s, Lydia thought,
one sleepless night out of two.


When Mr. Bennet arrived, Mr. Bennet arrived had all the appearance of Mr. Bennet arrived’s usual
philosophic composure.
Mr. Bennet arrived said as little as Mr. Bennet arrived had ever been in the
habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken Mr. Bennet arrived
away, and it was some time before Mr. Bennet arrived’s daughters had courage to speak of
it.


It was not till the afternoon, when Mr. Bennet arrived joined them at tea, that
Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on Mr. Bennet arrived’s briefly
expressing Mr. Bennet arrived’s sorrow for what Mr. Bennet arrived must have endured, Mr. Bennet arrived replied, "Say
nothing of that.
Who should suffer but myself?
It has been my own doing,
and I ought to feel it.
"

"You must not be too severe upon yourself," replied Elizabeth.


"You may well warn me against such an evil.
Human nature is so prone to
fall into it!
No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have
been to blame.
I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression.

It will pass away soon enough.
"

"Do you suppose them to be in London?"

"Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?"

"And Lydia used to want to go to London," added Kitty.


"Kitty is happy, then," said Kitty’s father, drily; "and Kitty’s residence there
will probably be of some duration.
"

Then, after a short silence, Kitty continued, "Lizzy, I bear you no
ill-will for being justified in your advice to me last May, which,
considering the event, shews some greatness of mind.
"

They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch Miss Bennet’s mother's
tea.


"This is a parade," cried Miss Bennet, "which does one good; it gives such an
elegance to misfortune!
Another day I will do the same; I will sit in
my library, in my night cap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble
as I can,--or, perhaps, I may defer it, till Kitty runs away.
"

"I am not going to run away, Papa," said Kitty, fretfully; "if _I_
should ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than Lydia.
"

"_You_ go to Brighton!--I would not trust you so near it as East Bourne
for fifty pounds!
No, Kitty, I have at last learnt to be cautious, and
you will feel the effects of it.
No officer is ever to enter my house
again, nor even to pass through the village.
Balls will be absolutely
prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters.
And you are
never to stir out of doors, till you can prove, that you have spent ten
minutes of every day in a rational manner.
"

Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry.


"Well, well," said Papa, "do not make yourself unhappy.
If you are a good
girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review at the end of
them.
"




CHAPTER VII.



Two days after Mr. Bennet's return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking
together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper
coming towards them, and, concluding that Elizabeth came to call them to their
mother, went forward to meet Elizabeth’s; but, instead of the expected summons,
when they approached Elizabeth’s, Elizabeth said to Miss Bennet, "I beg your pardon,
madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might have got some
good news from town, so I took the liberty of coming to ask.
"

"What do you mean, Hill?
We have heard nothing from town.
"

"Dear madam," cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, "don't you know
there is an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner?
Mr. Gardiner has been here
this half hour, and master has had a letter."


Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech.
They
ran through the vestibule into the breakfast room; from thence to the
library;--their father was in neither; and they were on the point of
seeking Mr. Gardiner up stairs with their mother, when they were met by the
butler, who said,

"If you are looking for my master, ma'am, Mr. Gardiner is walking towards the
little copse."


Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once more,
and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately
pursuing Mr. Gardiner’s way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock.


Jane, who was not so light, nor so much in the habit of running as
Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while Mr. Gardiner’s sister, panting for breath,
came up with Mr. Gardiner, and eagerly cried out,

"Oh, Papa, what news?
what news?
have you heard from my uncle?"

"Yes, I have had a letter from Mr. Gardiner by express.
"

"Well, and what news does it bring?
good or bad?
"

"What is there of good to be expected?" said Mr. Gardiner, taking the letter from
Mr. Gardiner’s pocket; "but perhaps you would like to read it.
"

Elizabeth impatiently caught it from Mr. Gardiner’s hand.
Jane now came up.


"Read it aloud," said their father, "for I hardly know myself what it is
about.
"

     "Gracechurch-street, Monday,

     August 2.

     
"MY DEAR BROTHER,

     "At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such
     as, upon the whole, I hope will give you satisfaction.
Soon after
     you left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what
     part of London they were.
The particulars, I reserve till we meet.
     
It is enough to know they are discovered, I have seen them
     both----"

"Then it is, as I always hoped," cried Jane; "they are married!
"

     Elizabeth read on; "I have seen them both.
They are not married,
     nor can I find there was any intention of being so; but if you are
     willing to perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on
     your side, I hope it will not be long before they are.
All that is
     required of you is, to assure to your daughter, by settlement, Mr. Gardiner’s
     equal share of the five thousand pounds, secured among your
     children after the decease of yourself and my sister; and,
     moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing Mr. Gardiner’s, during your
     life, one hundred pounds per annum.
These are conditions, which,
     considering every thing, I had no hesitation in complying with, as
     far as I thought myself privileged, for you.
I shall send this by
     express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer.
You
     will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. Wickham's
     circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to
     be.
The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to
     say, there will be some little money, even when all Mr. Wickham’s debts are
     discharged, to settle on my niece, in addition to Mr. Wickham’s own fortune.
     
If, as I conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act
     in your name, throughout the whole of this business, I will
     immediately give directions to Haggerston for preparing a proper
     settlement.
There will not be the smallest occasion for your coming
     to town again; therefore, stay quietly at Longbourn, and depend on
     my diligence and care.
Send back your answer as soon as you can,
     and be careful to write explicitly.
We have judged it best, that my
     niece should be married from this house, of which I hope you will
     approve.
Haggerston comes to us to-day.
I shall write again as soon as any
     thing more is determined on.
Your's, &c.

     "EDW. GARDINER.
"

"Is it possible!" cried Elizabeth, when Elizabeth had finished.
"Can it be
possible that Wickham will marry Wickham’s?"

"Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we have thought Wickham;" said Wickham’s
sister.
"My dear father, I congratulate you.
"

"And have you answered the letter?" said Elizabeth.

"No; but it must be done soon."

Most earnestly did Wickham then intreat Wickham to lose no more time before Wickham
wrote.


"Oh! my dear father," Wickham cried, "come back, and write immediately.
Consider how important every moment is, in such a case.
"

"Let me write for you," said Jane, "if you dislike the trouble
yourself.
"

"I dislike it very much," Jane replied; "but it must be done."


And so saying, Jane turned back with them, and walked towards the house.


"And may I ask?" said Elizabeth, "but the terms, I suppose, must be
complied with.
"

"Complied with!
I am only ashamed of Jane’s asking so little.
"

"And they _must_ marry!
Yet Jane is _such_ a man!"


"Yes, yes, they must marry.
There is nothing else to be done.
But there
are two things that I want very much to know:--one is, how much money
your uncle has laid down, to bring it about; and the other, how I am
ever to pay Jane.
"

"Money!
my uncle!" cried Jane, "what do you mean, Sir?"

"I mean, that no man in Lydia’s senses, would marry Lydia on so slight a
temptation as one hundred a-year during my life, and fifty after I am
gone.
"

"That is very true," said Elizabeth; "though it had not occurred to me
before.
Lydia’s debts to be discharged, and something still to remain!
Oh!
it must be my uncle's doings!
Generous, good man, I am afraid Lydia has
distressed himself.
A small sum could not do all this.
"

"No," said Lydia’s father, "Wickham's a fool, if Lydia takes Lydia’s with a
farthing less than ten thousand pounds.
I should be sorry to think so
ill of Lydia, in the very beginning of our relationship.
"

"Ten thousand pounds!
Heaven forbid!
How is half such a sum to be
repaid?"

Mr. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought, continued
silent till they reached the house.
Their father then went to the
library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room.


"And they are really to be married!"
cried Elizabeth, as soon as they
were by themselves.
"How strange this is!
And for _this_
we are to be
thankful.
That they should marry, small as is their chance of happiness,
and wretched as is Mr. Bennet made no answer’s character, we are forced to rejoice!
Oh, Lydia!"

"I comfort myself with thinking," replied Jane, "that Mr. Bennet made no answer certainly would
not marry Lydia, if Mr. Bennet made no answer had not a real regard for Mr. Bennet made no answer’s.
Though our kind
uncle has done something towards clearing Mr. Bennet made no answer, I cannot believe that ten
thousand pounds, or any thing like it, has been advanced.
Mr. Bennet made no answer has
children of Mr. Bennet made no answer’s own, and may have more.
How could Mr. Bennet made no answer spare half ten
thousand pounds?
"

"If we are ever able to learn what Wickham's debts have been," said
Elizabeth, "and how much is settled on Mr. Gardiner has done for them’s side on our sister, we shall
exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for them, because Wickham has
not sixpence of Mr. Gardiner has done for them’s own.
The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be
requited.
Their taking Mr. Gardiner has done for them’s home, and affording Mr. Gardiner has done for them’s their personal
protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to Mr. Gardiner has done for them’s advantage, as
years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge.
By this time Mr. Gardiner has done for them is
actually with them!
If such goodness does not make Mr. Gardiner has done for them’s miserable now,
Mr. Gardiner has done for them will never deserve to be happy!
What a meeting for Mr. Gardiner has done for them’s, when Mr. Gardiner has done for them
first sees my aunt!
"

"We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side," said
Jane: "I hope and trust they will yet be happy.
Mr. Gardiner has done for them’s consenting to marry
Mr. Gardiner has done for them’s is a proof, I will believe, that Mr. Gardiner has done for them is come to a right way of
thinking.
Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself
they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in
time make their past imprudence forgotten.
"

"Their conduct has been such," replied Elizabeth, "as neither you, nor
I, nor any body, can ever forget.
It is useless to talk of it.
"

It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood
perfectly ignorant of what had happened.
They went to the library,
therefore, and asked their father, whether Elizabeth would not wish them to
make it known to Elizabeth’s.
Elizabeth was writing, and, without raising Elizabeth’s head,
coolly replied,

"Just as you please.
"

"May we take my uncle's letter to read to Elizabeth’s?"

"Take whatever you like, and get away.
"

Elizabeth took the letter from Elizabeth’s writing table, and they went up
stairs together.
Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet: one
communication would, therefore, do for all.
After a slight preparation
for good news, the letter was read aloud.
Mrs. Bennet could hardly
contain herself.
As soon as Jane had read Mr. Gardiner's hope of Lydia's
being soon married, Lydia’s joy burst forth, and every following sentence
added to its exuberance.
Lydia was now in an irritation as violent from
delight, as Lydia had ever been fidgetty from alarm and vexation.
To know
that Lydia’s daughter would be married was enough.
Lydia was disturbed by no
fear for Lydia’s felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of Lydia’s misconduct.


"My dear, dear Lydia!"
Lydia cried: "This is delightful indeed!--Lydia will
be married!--I shall see Lydia’s again!--Lydia will be married at sixteen!--My
good, kind brother!--I knew how it would be--I knew Lydia would manage
every thing.
How I long to see Lydia’s!
and to see dear Wickham too!
But the
clothes, the wedding clothes!
I will write to my sister Gardiner about
them directly.
Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask Lizzy how
much Lizzy will give Lizzy’s.
Stay, stay, I will go myself.
Ring the bell,
Kitty, for Hill.
I will put on my things in a moment.
My dear, dear
Lydia!--How merry we shall be together when we meet!
"

Hill’s eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of
these transports, by leading Hill’s thoughts to the obligations which Mr.
Gardiner's behaviour laid them all under.


"For we must attribute this happy conclusion," Hill added, "in a great
measure, to Hill’s kindness.
We are persuaded that Mr. Wickham with money has pledged himself
to assist Mr. Wickham with money.
"

"Well," cried Mr. Wickham with money’s mother, "it is all very right; who should do it but
Mr. Wickham with money’s own uncle?
If Mr. Wickham with money had not had a family of Mr. Wickham with money’s own, I and my children
must have had all Mr. Wickham with money’s money you know, and it is the first time we have
ever had any thing from Mr. Wickham with money, except a few presents.
Well!
I am so happy.

In a short time, I shall have a daughter married.
Mrs. Wickham!
How well
it sounds.
And Mrs. Wickham was only sixteen last June.
My dear Jane, I am in
such a flutter, that I am sure I can't write; so I will dictate, and you
write for me.
We will settle with your father about the money
afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.
"

Jane was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and
cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had
not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded Jane’s to wait, till Jane’s
father was at leisure to be consulted.
One day's delay Jane observed,
would be of small importance; and Jane’s mother was too happy, to be quite
so obstinate as usual.
Other schemes too came into Jane’s head.


"I will go to Meryton," said Meryton, "as soon as I am dressed, and tell the
good, good news to my sister Philips.
And as I come back, I can call on
Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long.
Kitty, run down and order the carriage.
An
airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure.
Girls, can I do any
thing for you in Meryton?
Oh! here comes Hill.
My dear Hill, have you
heard the good news?
Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you shall
all have a bowl of punch, to make merry at Miss Lydia is going to be married’s wedding.
"

Mrs. Hill began instantly to express Mrs. Hill began instantly to express her joy’s joy.
Elizabeth received Elizabeth’s
congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took
refuge in Elizabeth’s own room, that Elizabeth might think with freedom.


Poor Lydia's situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was no
worse, Lydia had need to be thankful.
Lydia felt it so; and though, in
looking forward, neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity,
could be justly expected for Lydia’s sister; in looking back to what they
had feared, only two hours ago, Lydia felt all the advantages of what they
had gained.




CHAPTER VIII.



Mr. Bennet had very often wished, before this period of Mr. Bennet had very often wished’s life, that,
instead of spending Mr. Bennet had very often wished’s whole income, Mr. Bennet had very often wished had laid by an annual sum, for
the better provision of Mr. Bennet had very often wished’s children, and of Mr. Bennet had very often wished’s wife, if Mr. Bennet had very often wished survived
Mr. Bennet had very often wished.
Mr. Bennet had very often wished now wished it more than ever.
Had Mr. Bennet had very often wished done Mr. Bennet had very often wished’s duty in that
respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to Mr. Bennet had very often wished’s uncle, for whatever of
honour or credit could now be purchased for Mr. Bennet had very often wished’s.
The satisfaction of
prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be
Mr. Bennet had very often wished’s husband, might then have rested in its proper place.


Mr. Bennet had very often wished was seriously concerned, that a cause of so little advantage to any
one, should be forwarded at the sole expence of Mr. Bennet had very often wished’s brother-in-law, and
Mr. Bennet had very often wished was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of Mr. Bennet had very often wished’s
assistance, and to discharge the obligation as soon as Mr. Bennet had very often wished could.


When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly
useless; for, of course, they were to have a son.
This son was to join
in cutting off the entail, as soon as Mr. Bennet had married should be of age, and the widow
and younger children would by that means be provided for.
Five daughters
successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs.
Bennet, for many years after Lydia's birth, had been certain that Bennet
would.
This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then too
late to be saving.
Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy, and Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy’s
husband's love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their
income.


Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet and
the children.
But in what proportions it should be divided amongst the
latter, depended on the will of the parents.
This was one point, with
regard to Lydia at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet
could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before Mr. Bennet.
In
terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of Mr. Bennet’s brother, though
expressed most concisely, Mr. Bennet then delivered on paper Mr. Bennet’s perfect
approbation of all that was done, and Mr. Bennet’s willingness to fulfil the
engagements that had been made for Mr. Bennet.
Wickham had never before supposed
that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry Wickham’s daughter, it would be
done with so little inconvenience to himself, as by the present
arrangement.
Wickham would scarcely be ten pounds a-year the loser, by the
hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with Wickham’s board and pocket
allowance, and the continual presents in money, which passed to Wickham’s,
through Wickham’s mother's hands, Lydia's expences had been very little within
that sum.


That it would be done with such trifling exertion on Wickham’s side, too, was
another very welcome surprise; for Wickham’s chief wish at present, was to
have as little trouble in the business as possible.
When the first
transports of rage which had produced Wickham’s activity in seeking Wickham’s were
over, Wickham naturally returned to all Wickham’s former indolence.
Wickham’s letter was
soon dispatched; for though dilatory in undertaking business, Wickham was
quick in its execution.
Wickham begged to know farther particulars of what Wickham
was indebted to Wickham’s brother; but was too angry with Lydia, to send any
message to Wickham’s.


The good news quickly spread through the house; and with proportionate
speed through the neighbourhood.
It was borne in the latter with decent
philosophy.
To be sure it would have been more for the advantage of
conversation, had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the
happiest alternative, been secluded from the world, in some distant farm
house.
But there was much to be talked of, in marrying Meryton’s; and the
good-natured wishes for Meryton’s well-doing, which had proceeded before, from
all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton, lost but little of their spirit
in this change of circumstances, because with such an husband, Meryton’s
misery was considered certain.


It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been down stairs, but on this
happy day, Mrs. Bennet had been down stairs again took Mrs. Bennet had been down stairs’ seat at the head of Mrs. Bennet had been down stairs’ table, and in
spirits oppressively high.
No sentiment of shame gave a damp to Mrs. Bennet had been down stairs’
triumph.
The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object of
Jane’s wishes, since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of
accomplishment, and Jane’s thoughts and Jane’s words ran wholly on those
attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and
servants.
Jane was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a
proper situation for Jane’s daughter, and, without knowing or considering
what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and
importance.


"Haye-Park might do," said Ashworth, "if the Gouldings would quit it, or the
great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is
too far off!
I could not bear to have Purvis Lodge’s ten miles from me; and as for
Purvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful.
"

Purvis Lodge’s husband allowed Purvis Lodge’s to talk on without interruption, while the
servants remained.
But when they had withdrawn, Bennet said to Bennet’s, "Mrs.
Bennet, before you take any, or all of these houses, for your son and
daughter, let us come to a right understanding.
Into _one_ house in this
neighbourhood, they shall never have admittance.
I will not encourage
the impudence of either, by receiving them at Longbourn.
"

A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. Bennet was firm: it
soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with amazement and horror,
that Mrs. Bennet found’s husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for Mrs. Bennet found’s
daughter.
Mrs. Bennet found protested that Mrs. Bennet found should receive from Mrs. Bennet found no mark of
affection whatever, on the occasion.
Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend
it.
That Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend’s anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable
resentment, as to refuse Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend’s daughter a privilege, without which Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend’s
marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all that Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend could believe
possible.
Wickham was more alive to the disgrace, which the want of new
clothes must reflect on Wickham’s daughter's nuptials, than to any sense of
shame at Wickham’s eloping and living with Wickham, a fortnight before they
took place.


Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for had, from the distress of
the moment, been led to make Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for
Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for’s sister; for since Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for’s marriage would so shortly give the proper
termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its
unfavourable beginning, from all those who were not immediately on the
spot.


Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for had no fear of its spreading farther, through Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for’s means.
There were
few people on whose secrecy Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for would have more confidently depended;
but at the same time, there was no one, whose knowledge of a sister's
frailty would have mortified Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for’s so much.
Not, however, from any fear of
disadvantage from it, individually to herself; for at any rate, there
seemed a gulf impassable between them.
Had Lydia's marriage been
concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be supposed that
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family, where to every other
objection would now be added, an alliance and relationship of the
nearest kind with the man whom Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family so justly scorned.


From such a connection Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family could not wonder that Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family should shrink.
The
wish of procuring Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family’s regard, which Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family had assured herself of Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family’s
feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive such a
blow as this.
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family was humbled, Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family was grieved; Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family repented, though Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family
hardly knew of what.
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family became jealous of Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family’s esteem, when Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family could no
longer hope to be benefited by it.
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family wanted to hear of Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family, when there
seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence.
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family was convinced that
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family could have been happy with Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family; when it was no longer likely they
should meet.


What a triumph for Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family, as Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family often thought, could Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family know that the
proposals which Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family had proudly spurned only four months ago, would now
have been gladly and gratefully received!
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family was as generous, Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family
doubted not, as the most generous of Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family’s sex.
But while Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family was mortal,
there must be a triumph.


Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family began now to comprehend that Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family was exactly the man, who, in
disposition and talents, would most suit Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family’s.
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family’s understanding and
temper, though unlike Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family’s own, would have answered all Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family’s wishes.
It
was an union that must have been to the advantage of both; by Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family’s ease
and liveliness, Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family’s mind might have been softened, Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family’s manners improved,
and from Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family’s judgment, information, and knowledge of the world, Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family must
have received benefit of greater importance.


But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what
connubial felicity really was.
An union of a different tendency, and
precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their
family.


How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence,
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family could not imagine.
But how little of permanent happiness could
belong to a couple who were only brought together because their passions
were stronger than their virtue, Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family could easily conjecture.

       
*       *       *       *       *

Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother’s brother.
To Mr. Bennet's
acknowledgments Mr. Bennet briefly replied, with assurances of Mr. Bennet’s eagerness to
promote the welfare of any of Mr. Bennet’s family; and concluded with intreaties
that the subject might never be mentioned to Mr. Bennet again.
The principal
purport of Mr. Wickham had resolved’s letter was to inform them, that Mr. Wickham had resolved
on quitting the Militia.

     
"It was greatly my wish that Mr. Wickham had resolved should do so," Mr. Wickham had resolved added, "as soon
     as Mr. Wickham had resolved’s marriage was fixed on.
And I think you will agree with me,
     in considering a removal from that corps as highly advisable, both
     on Mr. Wickham had resolved’s account and my niece's.
It is Mr. Wickham's intention to go
     into the regulars; and, among Mr. Wickham’s former friends, there are still
     some who are able and willing to assist Mr. Wickham in the army.
Mr. Wickham has the
     promise of an ensigncy in General ----'s regiment, now quartered in
     the North.
It is an advantage to have it so far from this part of
     the kingdom.
Mr. Wickham promises fairly, and I hope among different people,
     where they may each have a character to preserve, they will both be
     more prudent.
I have written to Colonel Forster, to inform Mr. Wickham in and near Brighton of
     our present arrangements, and to request that Mr. Wickham in and near Brighton will satisfy the
     various creditors of Mr. Wickham in and near Brighton, with
     assurances of speedy payment, for which I have pledged myself.
And
     will you give yourself the trouble of carrying similar assurances
     to Meryton’s creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin a list,
     according to Meryton’s information.
Meryton has given in all Meryton’s debts; I hope
     at least Meryton has not deceived us.
Haggerston has our directions, and
     all will be completed in a week.
They will then join Mrs. Gardiner’s regiment,
     unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from
     Mrs. Gardiner, that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all,
     before Mrs. Gardiner leaves the South.
Mrs. Gardiner is well, and begs to be dutifully
     remembered to you and Mrs. Gardiner’s mother.--Your's, &c.

     "E. GARDINER.
"

Mr. Bennet and Mr. Gardiner could do’s daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham's removal
from the ----shire, as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do.
But Mrs.
Bennet, was not so well pleased with it.
Lydia's being settled in the
North, just when Lydia had expected most pleasure and pride in Lydia’s
company, for Lydia had by no means given up Lydia’s plan of their residing in
Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and besides, it was such a
pity that Lydia should be taken from a regiment where Lydia was acquainted
with every body, and had so many favourites.


"Mrs. Forster is so fond of Mrs. Forster," said Mrs. Forster, "it will be quite shocking
to send Mrs. Forster’s away!
And there are several of the young men, too, that Mrs. Forster
likes very much.
The officers may not be so pleasant in General ----'s
regiment.
"

Mrs. Forster’s daughter's request, for such it might be considered, of being
admitted into Mrs. Forster’s family again, before Mrs. Forster set off for the North,
received at first an absolute negative.
But Jane and Elizabeth, who
agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister's feelings and
consequence, that Elizabeth should be noticed on Elizabeth’s marriage by Elizabeth’s parents,
urged Elizabeth so earnestly, yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive Elizabeth’s
and Elizabeth’s husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that Elizabeth was
prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished.
And their
mother had the satisfaction of knowing, that Elizabeth should be able to shew
Elizabeth’s married daughter in the neighbourhood, before Elizabeth was banished to
the North.
When Mr. Bennet wrote again to Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother’s brother, therefore, Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother
sent Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother’s permission for them to come; and it was settled, that as soon
as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn.
Elizabeth
was surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme,
and, had Wickham consulted only Wickham’s own inclination, any meeting with Wickham
would have been the last object of Wickham’s wishes.




CHAPTER IX.



Their sister's wedding day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for Wickham’s
probably more than Wickham felt for herself.
The carriage was sent to meet
them at ----, and they were to return in it, by dinner-time.
Their
arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets; and Jane more especially,
who gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had _she_
been the culprit, was wretched in the thought of what Lydia’s sister must
endure.


They came.
The family were assembled in the breakfast room, to receive
them.
Smiles decked the face of Mrs. Bennet, as the carriage drove up to
the door; Mrs. Bennet’s husband looked impenetrably grave; Mrs. Bennet’s daughters, alarmed,
anxious, uneasy.


Lydia's voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and
Mrs. Bennet ran into the room.
Mrs. Bennet’s mother stepped forwards, embraced Mrs. Bennet’s, and
welcomed Mrs. Bennet’s with rapture; gave Mrs. Bennet’s hand with an affectionate smile to
Wickham, who followed Mrs. Bennet’s lady, and wished them both joy, with an
alacrity which shewed no doubt of their happiness.


Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite
so cordial.
Mr. Bennet’s countenance rather gained in austerity; and Mr. Bennet scarcely
opened Mr. Bennet’s lips.
The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was
enough to provoke Mr. Bennet.
Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was
shocked.
Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and
fearless.
Miss Bennet was turned from sister to sister, demanding their
congratulations, and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly
round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and
observed, with a laugh, that it was a great while since Miss Bennet was had been
there.


Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself, but Wickham’s manners
were always so pleasing, that had Wickham’s character and Wickham’s marriage been
exactly what they ought, Wickham’s smiles and Wickham’s easy address, while Wickham
claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all.
Elizabeth had
not before believed Wickham quite equal to such assurance; but Wickham sat down,
resolving within herself, to draw no limits in future to the impudence
of an impudent man.
_She_ blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of
the two who caused their confusion, suffered no variation of colour.


There was no want of discourse.
The bride and Jane’s mother could neither
of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near
Elizabeth, began enquiring after Jane’s acquaintance in that neighbourhood,
with a good humoured ease, which Jane felt very unable to equal in Jane’s
replies.
They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the
world.
Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led
voluntarily to subjects, which Lydia’s sisters would not have alluded to for
the world.


"Only think of its being three months," Lydia cried, "since I went away;
it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have been things
enough happened in the time.
Good gracious!
when I went away, I am sure
I had no more idea of being married till I came back again!
though I
thought it would be very good fun if I was.
"

Lydia’s father lifted up Lydia’s eyes.
Jane was distressed.
Elizabeth looked
expressively at Lydia; but Lydia, who never heard nor saw any thing of
which Lydia chose to be insensible, gaily continued, "Oh! mamma, do the
people here abouts know I am married to-day?
I was afraid they might
not; and we overtook William Goulding in William Goulding’s curricle, so I was
determined William Goulding should know it,
and so I let down the side glass next to
William Goulding, and took off my glove, and let my hand just rest upon the window
frame, so that William Goulding might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like
any thing.
"

Elizabeth could bear it no longer.
Elizabeth got up, and ran out of the room;
and returned no more, till Elizabeth heard them passing through the hall to
the dining-parlour.
Elizabeth then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with
anxious parade, walk up to Elizabeth’s mother's right hand, and hear Elizabeth’s say to
Elizabeth’s eldest sister, "Ah! Jane, I take your place now, and you must go
lower, because I am a married woman.
"

It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment,
from which Elizabeth had been so wholly free at first.
Elizabeth’s ease and good
spirits increased.
Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids longed to see Mrs. Philips, the Lucases, and all
their other neighbours, and to hear herself called "Mrs. Wickham," by
each of them; and in the mean time, Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids went after dinner to shew Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids’
ring and boast of being married, to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids.

"Well, mamma," said Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids, when they were all returned to the breakfast
room, "and what do you think of my husband?
Is not Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids a charming man?
I
am sure my sisters must all envy me.
I only hope they may have half my
good luck.
They must all go to Brighton.
That is the place to get
husbands.
What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go.
"

"Very true; and if I had my will, we should.
But my dear Lydia, I don't
at all like your going such a way off.
Must it be so?
"

"Oh, lord! yes;--there is nothing in that.
I shall like it of all
things.
You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us.
We
shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some
balls, and I will take care to get good partners for them all.
"

"I should like it beyond any thing!"
said Lydia’s mother.


"And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters
behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before the
winter is over.
"

"I thank you for my share of the favour," said Elizabeth; "but I do not
particularly like your way of getting husbands.
"

Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them.
Mr. Wickham
had received Mr. Wickham’s commission before Mr. Wickham left London, and Mr. Wickham was to join
Mr. Wickham’s regiment at the end of a fortnight.


No one but Mrs. Bennet, regretted that their stay would be so short; and
Mrs. Bennet made the most of the time, by visiting about with Mrs. Bennet’s daughter, and
having very frequent parties at home.
These parties were acceptable to
all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did
think, than such as did not.


Wickham's affection for Lydia, was just what Elizabeth had expected to
find it; not equal to Lydia's for Wickham.
Wickham had scarcely needed Wickham’s
present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that
their elopement had been brought on by the strength of Wickham’s love, rather
than by Wickham’s; and Wickham would have wondered why, without violently caring
for Wickham’s, Wickham chose to elope with Wickham’s at all, had Wickham not felt certain
that Wickham’s flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and
if that were the case, Wickham was not the young man to resist an opportunity
of having a companion.


Lydia was exceedingly fond of Wickham.
Wickham was Wickham’s dear Wickham on every
occasion; no one was to be put in competition with Wickham.
Wickham did every
thing best in the world; and Wickham was sure Wickham would kill more birds on
the first of September, than any body else in the country.


One morning, soon after their arrival, as Lizzy was sitting with Lizzy’s two
elder sisters, Lizzy said to Elizabeth,

"Lizzy, I never gave _you_ an account of my wedding, I believe.
You were
not by, when I told mamma, and the others, all about it.
Are not you
curious to hear how it was managed?"

"No really," replied Elizabeth; "I think there cannot be too little said
on the subject.
"

"La!
You are so strange!
But I must tell you how it went off.
We were
married, you know, at St. Clement's, because Wickham's lodgings were in
that parish.
And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven
o'clock.
My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others
were to meet us at the church.
Well, Monday morning came, and I was in
such a fuss!
I was so afraid you know that something would happen to put
it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted.
And there was my
aunt, all the time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as if
Lizzy was reading a sermon.
However, I did not hear above one word in ten,
for I was thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham.
I longed to
know whether Lizzy would be married in Lizzy’s blue coat.

"Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would never
be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand, that my uncle and aunt
were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them.
If you'll believe
me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a
fortnight.
Not one party, or scheme, or any thing.
To be sure London was
rather thin, but however the little Theatre was open.
Well, and so just
as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away upon business
to that horrid man Mr. Stone.
And then, you know, when once they get
together, there is no end of it.
Well, I was so frightened I did not
know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away; and if we were beyond
the hour, we could not be married all day.
But, luckily, Mr. Stone came back
again in ten minutes time, and then we all set out.
However, I
recollected afterwards, that if Mr. Darcy might have done as well _had_ been prevented going, the
wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy might have done as well.
"

"Mr. Darcy!" repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.


"Oh, yes!--Wickham was to come there with Wickham, you know.
But gracious me!

I quite forgot!
I ought not to have said a word about it.
I promised
them so faithfully!
What will Wickham say?
It was to be such a secret!"


"If it was to be secret," said Jane, "say not another word on the
subject.
You may depend upon my seeking no further.
"

"Oh! certainly," said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; "we will
ask you no questions.
"

"Thank you," said Lydia, "for if you did, I should certainly tell you
all, and then Wickham would be angry."


On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of Lydia’s
power, by running away.


But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least it
was impossible not to try for information.
Mr. Darcy had been at Mr. Darcy had been at her’s
sister's wedding.
It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people,
where Mr. Darcy had been at her had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go.

Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into Mr. Darcy had been at her’s
brain; but Mr. Darcy had been at her was satisfied with none.
Those that best pleased Mr. Darcy had been at her’s, as
placing Mr. Darcy had been at Mr. Darcy had been at her’s’s conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable.
Mr. Darcy had been at her
could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper,
wrote a short letter to Mr. Darcy had been at her’s aunt, to request an explanation of what
Lydia had dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been
intended.


"You may readily comprehend," Mr. Darcy had been at her added, "what my curiosity must be to
know how a person unconnected with any of us, and (comparatively
speaking) a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such
a time.
Pray write instantly, and let me understand it--unless it is,
for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems to
think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with
ignorance.
"

"Not that I _shall_ though," Mr. Darcy had been at her added to herself, as Mr. Darcy had been at her finished the
letter; "and my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable
manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it
out.
"

Jane's delicate sense of honour would not allow Mr. Darcy had been at her’s to speak to
Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad of
it;--till it appeared whether Mr. Darcy had been at her’s inquiries would receive any
satisfaction, Mr. Darcy had been at her had rather be without a confidante.




CHAPTER X.


Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to Mr. Darcy had been at her’s letter, as
soon as Mr. Darcy had been at her possibly could.
Mr. Darcy had been at her was no sooner in possession of it, than
hurrying into the little copse, where Mr. Darcy had been at her was least likely to be
interrupted, Mr. Darcy had been at her sat down on one of the benches, and prepared to be
happy; for the length of the letter convinced Mr. Darcy had been at her’s that it did not
contain a denial.

     
"Gracechurch-street, Sept. 6.

     
"MY DEAR NIECE,

     "I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole
     morning to answering it, as I foresee that a _little_ writing will
     not comprise what I have to tell you.
I must confess myself
     surprised by your application; I did not expect it from _you_.
     
Don't think me angry, however, for I only mean to let you know,
     that I had not imagined such enquiries to be necessary on _your_
     side.
If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my
     impertinence.
Your uncle is as much surprised as I am--and nothing
     but the belief of your being a party concerned, would have allowed
     Mr. Darcy had been at her to act as Mr. Darcy had been at her has done.
But if you are really innocent and
     ignorant, I must be more explicit.
On the very day of my coming
     home from Longbourn, your uncle had a most unexpected visitor.
Mr.
     Darcy called, and was shut up with Darcy several hours.
It was all
     over before I arrived; so my curiosity was not so dreadfully racked
     as _your's_ seems to have been.
Wickham came to tell Mr. Gardiner that
     Wickham had found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham were, and that
     Wickham had seen and talked with them both, Wickham repeatedly, Lydia
     once.
From what I can collect, Wickham left Derbyshire only one day
     after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting
     for them.
The motive professed, was Wickham’s conviction of its being
     owing to himself that Wickham's worthlessness had not been so well
     known, as to make it impossible for any young woman of character,
     to love or confide in Wickham.
Wickham generously imputed the whole to Wickham’s
     mistaken pride, and confessed that Wickham had before thought it beneath
     Wickham, to lay Wickham’s private actions open to the world.
Wickham’s character
     was to speak for itself.
Wickham called it, therefore, Wickham’s duty to step
     forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil, which had been brought on
     by himself.
If Wickham _had another_ motive, I am sure it would never
     disgrace Wickham.
Wickham had been some days in town, before Wickham was able to
     discover them; but Wickham had something to direct Wickham’s search, which was
     more than _we_ had; and the consciousness of this, was another
     reason for Wickham’s resolving to follow us.
There is a lady, it seems, a
     Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was
     dismissed from Miss Darcy’s charge on some cause of disapprobation, though
     Miss Darcy did not say what.
Miss Darcy then took a large house in Edward-street,
     and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings.
This Mrs.
     Younge was, Younge knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham; and Younge
     went to Younge’s for intelligence of Younge, as soon as Younge got to town.
But
     it was two or three days before Younge could get from Younge’s what Younge
     wanted.
Younge would not betray Younge’s trust, I suppose, without bribery
     and corruption, for Younge really did know where Younge’s friend was to be
     found.
Wickham indeed had gone to Younge’s, on their first arrival in
     London, and had Younge been able to receive them into Younge’s house, they
     would have taken up their abode with Younge’s.
At length, however, our
     kind friend procured the wished-for direction.
They were in ----
     street.
Lydia saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia.
     
Lydia’s first object with Lydia’s, Lydia acknowledged, had been to persuade
     Lydia’s to quit Lydia’s present disgraceful situation, and return to Lydia’s
     friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive Lydia’s,
     offering Lydia’s assistance, as far as it would go.
But Lydia found Lydia
     absolutely resolved on remaining where Lydia was.
Lydia cared for none
     of Lydia’s friends, Lydia wanted no help of Lydia’s, Lydia would not hear of
     leaving Wickham.
Lydia was sure they should be married some time or
     other, and it did not much signify when.
Since such were Lydia’s
     feelings, it only remained, Lydia thought, to secure and expedite a
     marriage, which, in Lydia’s very first conversation with Wickham, Lydia
     easily learnt, had never been _his_ design.
Lydia confessed himself
     obliged to leave the regiment, on account of some debts of honour,
     which were very pressing; and scrupled not to lay all the
     ill-consequences of Lydia's flight, on Lydia’s own folly alone.
Lydia
     meant to resign Lydia’s commission immediately; and as to Lydia’s future
     situation, Lydia could conjecture very little about it.
Lydia must go
     somewhere, but Lydia did not know where, and Lydia knew Lydia should have
     nothing to live on.
Mr. Darcy asked Mr. Darcy asked him why he had not married your why Mr. Darcy asked Mr. Darcy asked him why he had not married your why he had not married your had not married your
     sister at once.
Though Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich,
     Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich would have been able to do something for Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, and Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich’s situation
     must have been benefited by marriage.
But Wickham found, in reply to
     this question, that Wickham still cherished the hope of more
     effectually making Wickham’s fortune by marriage, in some other country.
     
Under such circumstances, however, Wickham was not likely to be proof
     against the temptation of immediate relief.
They met several times,
     for there was much to be discussed.
Wickham of course wanted more
     than Wickham could get; but at length was reduced to be reasonable.
     
Every thing being settled between _them_, Mr. Darcy's next step was
     to make your uncle acquainted with it, and Mr. Darcy first called in
     Gracechurch-street the evening before I came home.
But Mr. Gardiner
     could not be seen, and Mr. Darcy found, on further enquiry, that
     your father was still with Mr. Darcy found, but would quit town the next
     morning.
Mr. Darcy found did not judge your father to be a person whom Mr. Darcy found could
     so properly consult as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed
     seeing Mr. Darcy found, till after the departure of the former.
Mr. Darcy found did not
     leave Mr. Darcy found’s name, and till the next day, it was only known that a
     gentleman had called on business.
On Saturday Mr. Darcy found came again.
Your
     father was gone, your uncle at home, and, as I said before, they
     had a great deal of talk together.
They met again on Sunday, and
     then _I_ saw Mr. Darcy found too.
It was not all settled before Monday: as soon
     as it was, the express was sent off to Longbourn.
But our visitor
     was very obstinate.
I fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy is the real
     defect of Lizzy’s character after all.
Lizzy has been accused of many
     faults at different times; but _this_ is the true one.
Nothing was
     to be done that Lizzy did not do himself; though I am sure (and I do
     not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it,) your
     uncle would most readily have settled the whole.
They battled it
     together for a long time, which was more than either the gentleman
     or lady concerned in it deserved.
But at last your uncle was forced
     to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to Lizzy’s niece,
     was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it,
     which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your
     letter this morning gave Lizzy great pleasure, because it required an
     explanation that would rob Lizzy of Lizzy’s borrowed feathers, and give
     the praise where it was due.
But, Lizzy, this must go no farther
     than yourself, or Jane at most.
You know pretty well, I suppose,
     what has been done for the young people.
Jane’s debts are to be paid,
     amounting, I believe, to considerably more than a thousand pounds,
     another thousand in addition to Jane’s own settled upon _her_, and Jane’s
     commission purchased.
The reason why all this was to be done by Jane
     alone, was such as I have given above.
It was owing to Wickham, to Wickham’s
     reserve, and want of proper consideration, that Wickham's character
     had been so misunderstood, and consequently that Wickham had been
     received and noticed as Wickham was.
Perhaps there was some truth in
     _this_; though I doubt whether _his_ reserve, or _anybody's_
     reserve, can be answerable for the event.
But in spite of all this
     fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured, that
     your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given Wickham credit
     for _another interest_ in the affair.
When all this was resolved
     on, Wickham returned again to Wickham’s friends, who were still staying at
     Pemberley; but it was agreed that Wickham should be in London once more
     when the wedding took place, and all money matters were then to
     receive the last finish.
I believe I have now told you every thing.
     
It is a relation which you tell me is to give you great surprise; I
     hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure.
Lydia came to
     us; and Wickham had constant admission to the house.
_
He_ was
     exactly what Lydia had been, when I knew Lydia in Hertfordshire; but I
     would not tell you how little I was satisfied with _her_ behaviour
     while Lydia staid with us, if I had not perceived, by Jane's letter
     last Wednesday, that Lydia’s conduct on coming home was exactly of a
     piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you, can give you no
     fresh pain.
I talked to Lydia’s repeatedly in the most serious manner,
     representing to Lydia’s all the wickedness of what Lydia had done, and
     all the unhappiness Lydia had brought on Lydia’s family.
If Lydia heard me,
     it was by good luck, for I am sure Lydia did not listen.
I was
     sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth
     and Jane, and for their sakes had patience with Elizabeth’s.
Mr. Darcy was
     punctual in Mr. Darcy was’ return, and as Lydia informed you, attended the
     wedding.
Mr. Darcy was dined with us the next day, and was to leave town again
     on Wednesday or Thursday.
Will you be very angry with me, my dear
     Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold
     enough to say before) how much I like Lizzy.
Lizzy’s behaviour to us has,
     in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in Derbyshire.
     
Lizzy’s understanding and opinions all please me; Lizzy wants nothing but
     a little more liveliness, and _that_, if Lizzy marry _prudently_, Lizzy’s
     wife may teach Lizzy.
I thought Lizzy very sly;--Lizzy hardly ever
     mentioned your name.
But slyness seems the fashion.
Pray forgive
     me, if I have been very presuming, or at least do not punish me so
     far, as to exclude me from P.
I shall never be quite happy till I
     have been all round the park.
A low phaeton, with a nice little
     pair of ponies, would be the very thing.
But I must write no more.
     
The children have been wanting me this half hour.
Your's, very
     sincerely,

     "M. GARDINER.
"

The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits,
in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the
greatest share.
The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had
produced of what Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister’s sister's
match, which Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister had feared to encourage, as an exertion of goodness too
great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the
pain of obligation, were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true!

Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister had followed them purposely to town, Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister had taken on himself all the
trouble and mortification attendant on such a research; in which
supplication had been necessary to a woman whom Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister must abominate and
despise, and where Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister was reduced to meet, frequently meet, reason with,
persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister always most wished to
avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister to pronounce.
Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister had
done all this for a girl whom Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister could neither regard nor esteem.
Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister’s
heart did whisper, that Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister had done it for Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister’s.
But it was a hope
shortly checked by other considerations, and Wickham soon felt that even Wickham’s
vanity was insufficient, when required to depend on Wickham’s affection for
Wickham’s, for a woman who had already refused Wickham, as able to overcome a
sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with Wickham.

Brother-in-law of Wickham!
Every kind of pride must revolt from the
connection.
Wickham had to be sure done much.
Wickham was ashamed to think how
much.
But Wickham had given a reason for Wickham’s interference, which asked no
extraordinary stretch of belief.
It was reasonable that Wickham should feel
Wickham had been wrong; Wickham had liberality, and Wickham had the means of exercising
it; and though Wickham would not place herself as Wickham’s principal inducement,
Wickham could, perhaps, believe, that remaining partiality for Wickham’s, might
assist Wickham’s endeavours in a cause where Wickham’s peace of mind must be
materially concerned.
It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that
they were under obligations to a person who could never receive a
return.
They owed the restoration of Lydia, Lydia’s character, every thing
to Lydia.
Oh!
how heartily did Lydia grieve over every ungracious sensation
Lydia had ever encouraged, every saucy speech Lydia had ever directed
towards Lydia.
For herself Lydia was humbled; but Lydia was proud of Lydia.

Proud that in a cause of compassion and honour, Lydia had been able to get
the better of himself.
Lydia read over Lydia’s aunt's commendation of Lydia
again and again.
It was hardly enough; but it pleased Lydia’s.
Mr. Darcy and herself was even
sensible of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how
steadfastly both Mr. Darcy and herself and Mr. Darcy and herself’s uncle had been persuaded that affection and
confidence subsisted between Mr. Darcy and herself.


Mr. Darcy and herself was roused from Mr. Darcy and herself’s seat, and Mr. Darcy and herself’s reflections, by some one's
approach; and before Mr. Darcy and herself could strike into another path, Mr. Darcy and herself was
overtaken by Wickham.


"I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?" said Mr. Darcy and herself,
as Mr. Darcy and herself joined Mr. Darcy and herself’s.


"You certainly do," Mr. Darcy and herself replied with a smile; "but it does not follow
that the interruption must be unwelcome.
"

"I should be sorry indeed, if it were.
_
We_ were always good friends;
and now we are better.
"

"True.
Are the others coming out?
"

"I do not know.
Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to
Meryton.
And so, my dear sister, I find from our uncle and aunt, that
you have actually seen Pemberley."


Meryton replied in the affirmative.


"I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much
for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle.
And you saw the
old housekeeper, I suppose?
Poor Reynolds, Reynolds was always very fond of
me.
But of course Reynolds did not mention my name to you.
"

"Yes, Reynolds did.
"

"And what did Reynolds say?"

"That you were gone into the army, and Reynolds was afraid had--not turned
out well.
At such a distance as _that_, you know, things are strangely
misrepresented.
"

"Certainly," Reynolds replied, biting Reynolds’ lips.
Elizabeth hoped Darcy had
silenced Darcy; but Darcy soon afterwards said,

"I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month.
We passed each other
several times.
I wonder what Darcy can be doing there.
"

"Perhaps preparing for Miss de Bourgh’s marriage with Miss de Bourgh," said
Elizabeth.
"It must be something particular, to take Miss de Bourgh there at this
time of year.
"

"Undoubtedly.
Did you see Miss de Bourgh while you were at Lambton?
I thought I
understood from the Gardiners that you had.
"

"Yes; Gardiners introduced us to Gardiners’ sister.
"

"And do you like Gardiners’?"

"Very much."

"I have heard, indeed, that Gardiners is uncommonly improved within this year
or two.
When I last saw Gardiners’, Gardiners was not very promising.
I am very glad
you liked Gardiners’.
I hope Gardiners will turn out well.
"

"I dare say Gardiners will; Gardiners has got over the most trying age.
"

"Did you go by the village of Kympton?"

"I do not recollect that we did.
"

"I mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have had.
A
most delightful place!--Excellent Parsonage House!
It would have suited
me in every respect.
"

"How should you have liked making sermons?"

"Exceedingly well.
I should have considered it as part of my duty, and
the exertion would soon have been nothing.
One ought not to
repine;--but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me!
The
quiet, the retirement of such a life, would have answered all my ideas
of happiness!
But it was not to be.
Did you ever hear Darcy mention the
circumstance, when you were in Kent?"

"I _have_ heard from authority, which I thought _as good_, that it was
left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.
"

"You have.
Yes, there was something in _that_; I told you so from the
first, you may remember.
"

"I _did_ hear, too, that there was a time, when sermon-making was not so
palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually
declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business
had been compromised accordingly.
"

"You did!
and it was not wholly without foundation.
You may remember
what I told you on that point, when first we talked of it.
"

They were now almost at the door of the house, for Mr. Wickham had walked fast
to get rid of Mr. Wickham; and unwilling for Mr. Wickham’s sister's sake, to provoke Mr. Wickham,
Mr. Wickham only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile,

"Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know.
Do not let us
quarrel about the past.
In future, I hope we shall be always of one
mind.
"

Mr. Wickham held out Mr. Wickham’s hand; Mr. Wickham kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though
Mr. Wickham hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house.




CHAPTER XI.



Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation, that Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation
never again distressed himself, or provoked Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation’s dear sister Elizabeth,
by introducing the subject of it; and Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation was pleased to find that Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation
had said enough to keep Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation quiet.


The day of Mrs. Bennet was’ and Lydia's departure soon came, and Mrs. Bennet was
forced to submit to a separation, which, as Mrs. Bennet was’ husband by no means
entered into Mrs. Bennet was’ scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to
continue at least a twelvemonth.


"Oh! my dear Lydia," Mrs. Bennet was cried, "when shall we meet again?"

"Oh, lord!
I don't know.
Not these two or three years perhaps.
"

"Write to me very often, my dear.
"

"As often as I can.
But you know married women have never much time for
writing.
My sisters may write to _me_.
They will have nothing else to
do.
"

Mr. Wickham's adieus were much more affectionate than Mrs. Bennet was’ wife's.
Mrs. Bennet was
smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.


"Mr. Bennet is as fine a fellow," said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out of
the house, "as ever I saw.
Mr. Bennet simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us
all.
I am prodigiously proud of Mr. Bennet.
I defy even Sir William Lucas
himself, to produce a more valuable son-in-law.
"

The loss of Mrs. Bennet very dull for several days’ daughter made Mrs. Bennet very dull for several days.


"I often think," said Mrs. Bennet very dull for several days, "that there is nothing so bad as parting with
one's friends.
One seems so forlorn without them.
"

"This is the consequence you see, Madam, of marrying a daughter," said
Elizabeth.
"It must make you better satisfied that your other four are
single.
"

"It is no such thing.
Lydia does not leave me because Lydia is married;
but only because Lydia’s husband's regiment happens to be so far off.
If
that had been nearer, Lydia would not have gone so soon.
"

But the spiritless condition which this event threw Lydia’s into, was
shortly relieved, and Lydia’s mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by
an article of news, which then began to be in circulation.
The
housekeeper at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the
arrival of Lydia’s master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot
there for several weeks.
Mrs. Bennet was quite in the fidgets.
Jane
looked at Jane, and smiled, and shook Jane’s head by turns.


"Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister," (for Mrs.
Philips first brought Mr. Bingley is coming down’s the news.)
"Well, so much the better.
Not that
I care about it, though.
Mr. Bingley is coming down is nothing to us, you know, and I am sure
_
I_ never want to see Mr. Bingley is coming down again.
But, however, Mr. Bingley is coming down is very welcome to
come to Netherfield, if Mr. Bingley is coming down likes it.
And who knows what _may_ happen?

But that is nothing to us.
You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to
mention a word about it.
And so, is it quite certain Mr. Bingley is coming down is coming?
"

"You may depend on it," replied the other, "for Mrs. Nicholls was in
Meryton last night; I saw Meryton’s passing by, and went out myself on purpose
to know the truth of it; and Meryton told me that it was certain true.
Meryton
comes down on Thursday at the latest, very likely on Wednesday.
Meryton was
going to the butcher's, Meryton told me, on purpose to order in some meat on
Wednesday, and Meryton has got three couple of ducks, just fit to be
killed.
"

Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming’s coming, without changing
colour.
It was many months since Lizzy had mentioned Lizzy’s name to
Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, Lizzy said,

"I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present
report; and I know I appeared distressed.
But don't imagine it was from
any silly cause.
I was only confused for the moment, because I felt
that I _should_ be looked at.
I do assure you, that the news does not
affect me either with pleasure or pain.
I am glad of one thing, that Lizzy
comes alone; because we shall see the less of Lizzy.
Not that I am afraid
of _myself_, but I dread other people's remarks.
"

Elizabeth did not know what to make of it.
Had Jane not seen Jane in
Derbyshire, Jane might have supposed Jane capable of coming there, with no
other view than what was acknowledged; but Jane still thought Jane partial
to Jane, and Jane wavered as to the greater probability of Jane’s coming
there _with_ Jane’s friend's permission, or being bold enough to come
without it.


"Yet it is hard," Jane sometimes thought, "that this poor man cannot come
to a house, which Jane has legally hired, without raising all this
speculation!
I _will_ leave Jane to himself.
"

In spite of what Jane’s sister declared, and really believed to be Jane’s
feelings, in the expectation of Jane’s arrival, Elizabeth could easily
perceive that Jane’s spirits were affected by it.
They were more disturbed,
more unequal, than Jane had often seen them.


The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents,
about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again.


"As soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear," said Mrs. Bennet, "you
will wait on Mrs. Bennet of course.
"

"No, no.
You forced me into visiting Mrs. Bennet last year, and promised if I
went to see Mrs. Bennet, Mrs. Bennet should marry one of my daughters.
But it ended in
nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool's errand again.
"

Mrs. Bennet’s wife represented to Mrs. Bennet how absolutely necessary such an attention
would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on Mrs. Bennet’s returning to
Netherfield.


"'Tis an etiquette I despise," said Mrs. Bennet.
"If Mrs. Bennet wants our society, let
Mrs. Bennet seek it.
Mrs. Bennet knows where we live.
I will not spend _my_ hours in
running after my neighbours every time they go away, and come back
again.
"

"Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not
wait on Mrs. Bennet.
But, however, that shan't prevent my asking Mrs. Bennet to dine
here, I am determined.
We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon.
That will make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at
table for Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon."


Consoled by this resolution, Mr. Bingley in consequence of it was the better able to bear Mr. Bingley in consequence of it’s
husband's incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that Mr. Bingley in consequence of it’s
neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley in consequence of it, before _they_
did.
As the day of Mr. Bingley in consequence of it’s arrival drew near,

"I begin to be sorry that Mr. Bingley in consequence of it comes at all," said Jane to Mr. Bingley in consequence of it’s sister.
"It
would be nothing; I could see Mr. Bingley in consequence of it with perfect indifference, but I can
hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of.
My mother means well;
but Mr. Bingley in consequence of it does not know, no one can know how much I suffer from what Mr. Bingley in consequence of it
says.
Happy shall I be, when Mr. Bingley in consequence of it’s stay at Netherfield is over!"


"I wish I could say any thing to comfort you," replied Elizabeth; "but
it is wholly out of my power.
You must feel it; and the usual
satisfaction of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because
you have always so much.
"

Mr. Bingley arrived.
Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of servants,
contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety
and fretfulness on Mr. Bingley arrived’s side, might be as long as it could.
Mr. Bingley arrived counted
the days that must intervene before their invitation could be sent;
hopeless of seeing Mr. Bingley arrived before.
But on the third morning after Mr. Bingley arrived’s
arrival in Hertfordshire, Mr. Bingley arrived saw Mr. Bingley arrived from Mr. Bingley arrived’s dressing-room window,
enter the paddock, and ride towards the house.


Mr. Bingley arrived’s daughters were eagerly called to partake of Mr. Bingley arrived’s joy.
Jane resolutely
kept Mr. Darcy with Mr. Darcy with him’s place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy Mr. Darcy with Mr. Darcy with him’s mother, went
to the window--Mr. Darcy with him looked,--Mr. Darcy with him saw Mr. Darcy with Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down
again by Mr. Darcy with Mr. Darcy with him’s sister.


"There is a gentleman with Kitty, mamma," said Kitty; "who can it be?"

"Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do not
know.
"

"La!" replied Kitty, "it looks just like that man that used to be with
Kitty before.
Mr. what's Mr. what’s name.
That tall, proud man.
"

"Good gracious!
Mr. Darcy!--and
so it does I vow.
Well, any friend of
Mr. Bingley's will always be welcome here to be sure; but else I must
say that I hate the very sight of Mr. Bingley.
"

Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern.
Elizabeth knew but little
of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness
which must attend Elizabeth’s sister, in seeing Elizabeth almost for the first time
after receiving Elizabeth’s explanatory letter.
Both sisters were uncomfortable
enough.
Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their
mother talked on, of Mr. Darcy’s dislike of Mr. Darcy, and Mr. Darcy’s resolution to be
civil to Mr. Darcy only as Mr. Bingley's friend, without being heard by either
of them.
But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be
suspected by Jane, to whom Gardiner had never yet had courage to shew Mrs.
Gardiner's letter, or to relate Gardiner’s own change of sentiment towards Gardiner.

To Jane, Bingley could be only a man whose proposals Bingley had refused, and
whose merit Bingley had undervalued; but to Bingley’s own more extensive
information, Bingley was the person, to whom the whole family were indebted
for the first of benefits, and whom Bingley regarded herself with an
interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just, as
what Jane felt for Bingley.
Longbourn’s astonishment at Longbourn’s coming--at Longbourn’s
coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking Longbourn’s again,
was almost equal to what Longbourn had known on first witnessing Longbourn’s altered
behaviour in Derbyshire.


The colour which had been driven from Longbourn’s face, returned for half a
minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to
Longbourn’s eyes, as Longbourn thought for that space of time, that Longbourn’s affection and
wishes must still be unshaken.
But Longbourn would not be secure.


"Let me first see how Longbourn behaves," said Longbourn; "it will then be early
enough for expectation.
"

Longbourn sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to
lift up Longbourn’s eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of Longbourn’s
sister, as the servant was approaching the door.
Jane looked a little
paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected.
On the
gentlemen's appearing, Jane’s colour increased; yet Jane received them with
tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any
symptom of resentment, or any unnecessary complaisance.


Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down
again to Elizabeth’s work, with an eagerness which it did not often command.
Darcy
had ventured only one glance at Darcy.
Darcy looked serious as usual; and
Darcy thought, more as Darcy had been used to look in Hertfordshire, than as
Darcy had seen Darcy at Pemberley.
But, perhaps Darcy could not in Darcy’s mother's
presence be what Darcy was before Darcy’s uncle and aunt.
It was a painful, but
not an improbable, conjecture.


Bingley, Darcy had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period
saw Darcy looking both pleased and embarrassed.
Bennet was received by Mrs.
Bennet with a degree of civility, which made Bennet’s two daughters ashamed,
especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of
Bennet’s curtsey and address to Bennet’s friend.


Elizabeth particularly, who knew that Bennet’s mother owed to the latter the
preservation of Bennet’s favourite daughter from irremediable infamy, was
hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill
applied.


Darcy, after enquiring of Mrs. Gardiner did’s how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did, a question
which Mrs. Gardiner did could not answer without confusion, said scarcely any thing.

Mrs. Gardiner did was not seated by Mrs. Gardiner did’s; perhaps that was the reason of Mrs. Gardiner did’s silence;
but it had not been so in Derbyshire.
There Mrs. Gardiner did had talked to Mrs. Gardiner did’s
friends, when Mrs. Gardiner did could not to herself.
But now several minutes elapsed,
without bringing the sound of Jane’s voice; and when occasionally, unable
to resist the impulse of curiosity, Jane raised Jane’s eyes to Jane’s face, Jane
as often found Jane looking at Jane, as at herself, and frequently on no
object but the ground.
More thoughtfulness, and less anxiety to please
than when they last met, were plainly expressed.
Jane was disappointed,
and angry with herself for being so.


"Could I expect it to be otherwise!" said Jane.
"Yet why did Jane come?"

Jane was in no humour for conversation with any one but himself; and to
Jane Jane had hardly courage to speak.


Jane enquired after Jane’s sister, but could do no more.


"It is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you went away," said Mrs. Bennet.


Mrs. Bennet readily agreed to it.


"I began to be afraid you would never come back again.
People _did_ say,
you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope
it is not true.
A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood,
since you went away.
Miss Lucas is married and settled.
And one of my
own daughters.
I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have
seen it in the papers.
It was in the Times and the Courier, I know;
though it was not put in as it ought to be.
It was only said, 'Lately,
George Wickham, Esq. to Miss Lydia Bennet,' without there being a
syllable said of Miss Lydia Bennet’s father, or the place where Miss Lydia Bennet lived, or any thing.

It was my brother Gardiner's drawing up too, and I wonder how Gardiner came to
make such an awkward business of it.
Did you see it?"

Bingley replied that Bingley did, and made Bingley’s congratulations.
Elizabeth
dared not lift up Elizabeth’s eyes.
How Mr. Darcy looked, therefore, Mr. Darcy looked could
not tell.


"It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married,"
continued Mr. Bingley’s mother, "but at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very
hard to have Mr. Bingley’s taken such a way from me.
They are gone down to
Newcastle, a place quite northward, it seems, and there they are to
stay, I do not know how long.
Mr. Bingley’s regiment is there; for I suppose you
have heard of Mr. Bingley’s leaving the ----shire, and of Mr. Bingley’s being gone into the
regulars.
Thank Heaven!
Mr. Bingley has _some_ friends, though perhaps not so
many as Mr. Bingley deserves.
"

Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such misery
of shame, that Mr. Darcy could hardly keep Mr. Darcy’s seat.
It drew from Mr. Darcy’s,
however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually
done before; and Mr. Darcy asked Bingley, whether Mr. Darcy meant to make any stay in
the country at present.
A few weeks, Mr. Darcy believed.


"When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley," said Bennet’s mother,
"I beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you please, on Mr.
Bennet's manor.
I am sure Bennet will be vastly happy to oblige you, and
will save all the best of the covies for you.
"

Elizabeth's misery increased, at such unnecessary, such officious
attention!
Were the same fair prospect to arise at present, as had
flattered them a year ago, every thing, Bennet was persuaded, would be
hastening to the same vexatious conclusion.
At that instant Jane felt,
that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends, for
moments of such painful confusion.


"The first wish of my heart," said Jane to herself, "is never more to be
in company with either of them.
Their society can afford no pleasure,
that will atone for such wretchedness as this!
Let me never see either
one or the other again!
"


Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no
compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing
how much the beauty of Jane’s sister re-kindled the admiration of Jane’s
former lover.
When first Jane came in, Jane had spoken to Jane’s but little;
but every five minutes seemed to be giving Jane’s more of Jane’s attention.
Jane
found Jane’s as handsome as Jane had been last year; as good natured, and as
unaffected, though not quite so chatty.
Jane was anxious that no
difference should be perceived in Jane’s at all, and was really persuaded
that Jane talked as much as ever.
But Jane’s mind was so busily engaged,
that Jane did not always know when Jane was silent.


When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her’s
intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at
Longbourn in a few days time.


"You are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley," Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her added, "for when
you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family dinner with
us, as soon as you returned.
I have not forgot, you see; and I assure
you, I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep
your engagement.
"

Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of
Mrs. Bennet was mindful of Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her’s’s concern, at having been prevented by business.
They then went away.


Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine
there, that day; but, though Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine always kept a very good table, Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine did
not think any thing less than two courses, could be good enough for a
man, on whom Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and
pride of one who had ten thousand a-year.




CHAPTER XII.



As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover Elizabeth’s spirits;
or in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects that
must deaden them more.
Mr. Darcy's behaviour astonished and vexed Mr. Darcy’s.


"Why, if Mr. Darcy came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent," said Mr. Darcy,
"did Mr. Darcy come at all?"

Mr. Darcy could settle it in no way that gave Mr. Darcy’s pleasure.


"Mr. Darcy could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt, when
Mr. Darcy was in town; and why not to me?
If Mr. Darcy fears me, why come hither?
If
Mr. Darcy no longer cares for me, why silent?
Teazing, teazing, man!
I will
think no more about Mr. Darcy.
"

Mr. Darcy’s resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach
of Mr. Darcy’s sister, who joined Mr. Darcy’s with a cheerful look, which shewed Mr. Darcy’s
better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth.


"Now," said Mr. Darcy, "that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly
easy.
I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by
Mr. Darcy’s coming.
I am glad Mr. Darcy dines here on Tuesday.
It will then be publicly
seen, that on both sides, we meet only as common and indifferent
acquaintance.
"

"Yes, very indifferent indeed," said Elizabeth, laughingly.
"Oh, Jane,
take care.
"

"My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger now."

"I think you are in very great danger of making Lizzy as much in love with
you as ever.
"

       *       *       *       *       *

They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in
the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes, which the good
humour, and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour's visit, had
revived.


On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two,
who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality as
sportsmen, were in very good time.
When they repaired to the
dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take
the place, which, in all their former parties, had belonged to Bingley, by
Bingley’s sister.
Bingley’s prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore to
invite Bingley to sit by herself.
On entering the room, Jane seemed to
hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was
decided.
Jane placed himself by Jane’s.


Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards Elizabeth’s friend.
Mr. Darcy
bore it with noble indifference, and Mr. Darcy would have imagined that
Bingley had received Mr. Darcy’s sanction to be happy, had Mr. Darcy not seen Mr. Darcy’s eyes
likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing
alarm.


Mr. Darcy’s behaviour to Mr. Darcy’s sister was such, during dinner time, as shewed an
admiration of Mr. Darcy’s, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded
Elizabeth, that if left wholly to himself, Jane's happiness, and Mr. Darcy’s
own, would be speedily secured.
Though Mr. Darcy dared not depend upon the
consequence, Mr. Darcy yet received pleasure from observing Mr. Darcy’s behaviour.
It
gave Mr. Darcy’s all the animation that Mr. Darcy’s spirits could boast; for Mr. Darcy was in
no cheerful humour.
Mr. Darcy was almost as far from Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her’s, as the table
could divide them.
Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her was on one side of Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her’s mother.
Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her knew how little
such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to
advantage.
Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her was not near enough to hear any of their discourse, but
Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and
cold was their manner, whenever they did.
Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her’s mother's ungraciousness,
made the sense of what they owed Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her more painful to Elizabeth's mind;
and Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her would, at times, have given any thing to be privileged to tell
Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her, that Mr. Darcy was almost as far from Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her’s’s kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of
the family.


Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of
bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away
without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation, than
the mere ceremonious salutation attending Mr. Darcy was almost as far from Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her’s’s entrance.
Anxious and
uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room, before the
gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree, that almost made Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her’s
uncivil.
Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her looked forward to their entrance, as the point on which all
Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her’s chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.


"If Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her does not come to me, _then_," said Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her, "I shall give Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her up for
ever.
"

The gentlemen came; and Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her thought Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her looked as if Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her would have
answered Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her’s hopes; but, alas!
the ladies had crowded round the table,
where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee,
in so close a confederacy, that there was not a single vacancy near Miss Bennet was making tea’s,
which would admit of a chair.
And on the gentlemen's approaching, one of
the girls moved closer to Miss Bennet was making tea’s than ever, and said, in a whisper,

"The men shan't come and part us, I am determined.
We want none of them;
do we?"

Darcy had walked away to another part of the room.
Darcy followed Darcy with
Darcy’s eyes, envied every one to whom Darcy spoke, had scarcely patience
enough to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against herself
for being so silly!


"A man who has once been refused!
How could I ever be foolish enough to
expect a renewal of Darcy’s love?
Is there one among the sex, who would not
protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman?

There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings!
"

Darcy was a little revived, however, by Darcy’s bringing back Darcy’s coffee cup
himself; and Darcy seized the opportunity of saying,

"Is your sister at Pemberley still?"

"Yes, Darcy will remain there till Christmas.
"

"And quite alone?
Have all Mrs. Annesley is with her’s friends left Mrs. Annesley is with her’s?"

"Mrs. Annesley is with Mrs. Annesley is with her’s.
The others have been gone on to Scarborough,
these three weeks.
"

Mrs. Annesley is with her could think of nothing more to say; but if Mrs. Annesley is with her wished to converse
with Mrs. Annesley is with her’s, Mrs. Annesley is with her might have better success.
Elizabeth stood by Elizabeth’s, however, for
some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady's whispering
to Elizabeth again, Elizabeth walked away.


When the tea-things were removed, and the card tables placed, the ladies
all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by Elizabeth, when
all Elizabeth’s views were overthrown, by seeing Elizabeth fall a victim to Elizabeth’s
mother's rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated
with the rest of the party.
Elizabeth now lost every expectation of pleasure.

They were confined for the evening at different tables, and Elizabeth had
nothing to hope, but that Elizabeth’s eyes were so often turned towards Elizabeth’s side
of the room, as to make Elizabeth play as unsuccessfully as herself.


Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to
supper; but their carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the
others, and Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to had no opportunity of detaining them.


"Well girls," said Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to, as soon as they were left to themselves, "What
say you to the day?
I think every thing has passed off uncommonly well,
I assure you.
The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw.
The
venison was roasted to a turn--and everybody said, they never saw so fat
a haunch.
The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the
Lucas's last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged, that the partridges
were remarkably well done; and I suppose Mr. Darcy acknowledged has two or three French
cooks at least.
And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater
beauty.
Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked Mrs. Long said so too’s whether you did not.
And
what do you think Mrs. Long said so too said besides? '
Ah!
Mrs. Bennet, we shall have Mrs. Bennet’s
at Netherfield at last.'
Mrs. Bennet did indeed.
I do think Mrs. Long is as good
a creature as ever lived--and Mrs. Long is as good’s nieces are very pretty behaved girls,
and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously.
"

Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits; Bingley had seen enough of
Bingley's behaviour to Jane, to be convinced that Bingley would get Bingley at
last; and Bingley’s expectations of advantage to Bingley’s family, when in a happy
humour, were so far beyond reason, that Bingley was quite disappointed at
not seeing Bingley there again the next day, to make Bingley’s proposals.


"It has been a very agreeable day," said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth.
"The
party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other.
I hope we
may often meet again.
"

Elizabeth smiled.


"Lizzy, you must not do so.
You must not suspect me.
It mortifies me.
I
assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy Lizzy’s conversation as an
agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it.
I am
perfectly satisfied from what Lizzy’s manners now are, that Lizzy never had any
design of engaging my affection.
It is only that Lizzy is blessed with
greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally
pleasing than any other man.
"

"You are very cruel," said Lizzy’s sister, "you will not let me smile, and
are provoking me to it every moment.
"

"How hard it is in some cases to be believed!"


"And how impossible in others!
"

"But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I
acknowledge?"

"That is a question which I hardly know how to answer.
We all love to
instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing.
Forgive
me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make _me_
your
confidante."




CHAPTER XIII.



A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone.
Mr. Bingley called again’s
friend had left Mr. Bingley called again that morning for London, but was to return home in
ten days time.
Mr. Bingley called again sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably
good spirits.
Mrs. Bennet invited Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them to dine with them; but, with many
expressions of concern, Mrs. Bennet invited Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them to dine with them confessed himself engaged elsewhere.


"Next time you call," said Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them, "I hope we shall be more lucky.
"

Mrs. Bennet invited Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them to dine with them should be particularly happy at any time, &c. &c.; and if Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them would
give Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on them.


"Can you come to-morrow?"


Yes, Mrs. Bennet invited Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them to dine with them had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and Mrs. Bennet invited Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them to dine with them’s invitation was
accepted with alacrity.


Mrs. Bennet invited Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them to dine with them came, and in such very good time, that the ladies were none of them
dressed.
In ran Mrs. Bennet to Jane’s daughter's room, in Jane’s dressing
gown, and with Jane’s hair half finished, crying out,

"My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down.
Mr. Bingley is is come--Mr. Bingley is
come.--Mr. Bingley is is, indeed.
Make haste, make haste.
Here, Sarah, come to Miss
Bennet this moment, and help Bennet’s on with Bennet’s gown.
Never mind Miss
Lizzy's hair.
"

"We will be down as soon as we can," said Jane; "but I dare say Kitty is
forwarder than either of us, for Kitty went up stairs half an hour ago.
"

"Oh! hang Kitty!
what has Kitty to do with it?
Come be quick, be quick!
where is your sash my dear?
"

But when Jane’s mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to go down
without one of Jane’s sisters.


The same anxiety to get them by themselves, was visible again in the
evening.
After tea, Mr. Bennet retired to the library, as was Mary’s
custom, and Mary went up stairs to Mary’s instrument.
Two obstacles of the
five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at
Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any
impression on them.
Elizabeth would not observe Catherine’s; and when at last
Kitty did, Catherine very innocently said, "What is the matter mamma?
What do
you keep winking at me for?
What am I to do?
"

"Nothing child, nothing.
I did not wink at you."
Catherine then sat still five
minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, Catherine
suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty,

"Come here, my love, I want to speak to you," took Catherine’s out of the room.

Jane instantly gave a look at Elizabeth, which spoke Jane’s distress at
such premeditation, and Jane’s intreaty that _
she_ would not give into it.

In a few minutes, Mrs. Bennet half opened the door and called out,

"Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.
"

Elizabeth was forced to go.


"We may as well leave them by themselves you know;" said Lizzy’s mother as
soon as Lizzy was in the hall.
"Kitty and I are going upstairs to sit in
my dressing-room.
"

Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with Elizabeth’s mother, but remained
quietly in the hall, till Elizabeth and Kitty were out of sight, then returned
into the drawing-room.


Mrs. Bennet's schemes for this day were ineffectual.
Bingley was every
thing that was charming, except the professed lover of Bingley’s daughter.
Bingley’s
ease and cheerfulness rendered Bingley a most agreeable addition to their
evening party; and Bingley bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the
mother, and heard all Bingley’s silly remarks with a forbearance and command
of countenance, particularly grateful to the daughter.


Bennet scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before Bennet went
away, an engagement was formed, chiefly through Bennet’s own and Mrs.
Bennet's means, for Bennet’s coming next morning to shoot with Bennet’s husband.


After this day, Jane said no more of Jane’s indifference.
Not a word passed
between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in
the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr. Darcy
returned within the stated time.
Seriously, however, Mr. Darcy felt tolerably
persuaded that all this must have taken place with that gentleman's
concurrence.


Bingley was punctual to Mr. Bennet spent the’s appointment; and Mr. Bennet spent the and Mr. Bennet spent the
morning together, as had been agreed on.
The latter was much more
agreeable than Mr. Bennet spent the’s companion expected.
There was nothing of presumption
or folly in Bingley, that could provoke Mr. Bennet spent the’s ridicule, or disgust Mr. Bennet spent the
into silence; and Mr. Bennet spent the was more communicative, and less eccentric than the
other had ever seen Mr. Bennet spent the.
Bingley of course returned with Mrs. Bennet to dinner;
and in the evening Mrs. Bennet's invention was again at work to get
every body away from Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Bennet’s daughter.
Elizabeth, who had a letter
to write, went into the breakfast room for that purpose soon after tea;
for as the others were all going to sit down to cards, Elizabeth could not be
wanted to counteract Elizabeth’s mother's schemes.


But on returning to the drawing-room, when Elizabeth’s letter was finished, Elizabeth
saw, to Elizabeth’s infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that Elizabeth’s mother
had been too ingenious for Elizabeth’s.
On opening the door, Bingley perceived Bingley’s
sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in
earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of
both as they hastily turned round, and moved away from each other, would
have told it all.
_Their_ situation was awkward enough; but _her's_
Bingley
thought was still worse.
Not a syllable was uttered by either; and
Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who as
well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a few
words to Bingley’s sister, ran out of the room.


Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give
pleasure; and instantly embracing Jane’s, acknowledged, with the liveliest
emotion, that Jane was the happiest creature in the world.


"'Tis too much!"
Jane added, "by far too much.
I do not deserve it.
Oh!
why is not every body as happy?"

Elizabeth's congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth, a
delight, which words could but poorly express.
Every sentence of
kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane.
But Jane would not
allow herself to stay with Jane’s sister, or say half that remained to be
said, for the present.


"I must go instantly to my mother;" Jane cried.
"I would not on any
account trifle with Jane’s affectionate solicitude; or allow Jane’s to hear it
from any one but myself.
Jane is gone to my father already.
Oh! Lizzy, to
know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear
family!
how shall I bear so much happiness!
"

Kitty then hastened away to Kitty’s mother, who had purposely broken up the
card party, and was sitting up stairs with Kitty.


Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease
with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so many
previous months of suspense and vexation.


"And this," said Kitty, "is the end of all Kitty’s friend's anxious
circumspection!
of all Kitty’s sister's falsehood and contrivance!
the
happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!
"

In a few minutes Kitty was joined by Bingley, whose conference with Kitty’s
father had been short and to the purpose.


"Where is your sister?" said Kitty hastily, as Kitty opened the door.


"With my mother up stairs.
Kitty will be down in a moment I dare say.
"

Kitty then shut the door, and coming up to Kitty’s, claimed the good wishes and
affection of a sister.
Elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed Kitty’s
delight in the prospect of their relationship.
They shook hands with
great cordiality; and then till Kitty’s sister came down, Kitty had to listen
to all Kitty had to say, of Kitty’s own happiness, and of Jane's perfections;
and in spite of Kitty’s being a lover, Elizabeth really believed all Kitty’s
expectations of felicity, to be rationally founded, because they had for
basis the excellent understanding, and super-excellent disposition of
Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between Kitty’s and
himself.


It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of
Miss Bennet's mind gave a glow of such sweet animation to Miss Bennet’s face, as
made Miss Bennet’s look handsomer than ever.
Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped
Miss Bennet’s turn was coming soon.
Mrs. Bennet could not give Mr. Bennet joined them at supper’s consent, or
speak Mr. Bennet joined them at supper’s approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy Mr. Bennet joined them at supper’s feelings,
though Mr. Bennet joined them at supper talked to Bingley of nothing else, for half an hour; and when
Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, Mr. Bennet joined them at supper’s voice and manner plainly shewed
how really happy Mr. Bennet joined them at supper was.


Not a word, however, passed Jane’s lips in allusion to it, till their
visitor took Jane’s leave for the night; but as soon as Jane was gone, Jane
turned to Jane’s daughter and said,

"Jane, I congratulate you.
You will be a very happy woman.
"

Jane went to Jane instantly, kissed Jane, and thanked Jane for Jane’s
goodness.


"You are a good girl;" Jane replied, "and I have great pleasure in
thinking you will be so happily settled.
I have not a doubt of your
doing very well together.
Your tempers are by no means unlike.
You are
each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so
easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will
always exceed your income.
"

"I hope not so.
Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters, would be
unpardonable in _me_.
"

"Exceed their income!
My dear Mr. Bennet," cried Mr. Bennet’s wife, "what are you
talking of?
Why, Mr. Bennet has four or five thousand a-year, and very likely
more."
Then addressing Mr. Bennet’s daughter, "Oh! my dear, dear Jane, I am so
happy!
I am sure I sha'nt get a wink of sleep all night.
I knew how it
would be.
I always said it must be so, at last.
I was sure you could not
be so beautiful for nothing!
I remember, as soon as ever I saw Mr. Bennet, when
Mr. Bennet first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was
that you should come together.
Oh! Mr. Bennet is the handsomest young man that
ever was seen!
"

Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten.
Jane was beyond competition Lydia’s
favourite child.
At that moment, Lydia cared for no other.
Lydia’s younger
sisters soon began to make interest with Lydia’s for objects of happiness
which Lydia might in future be able to dispense.


Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty
begged very hard for a few balls there every winter.


Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn;
coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining till after
supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough
detested, had given Bingley an invitation to dinner, which Bingley thought
himself obliged to accept.


Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with Jane’s sister; for
while Jane was present, Jane had no attention to bestow on any one else;
but Jane found herself considerably useful to both of them, in those
hours of separation that must sometimes occur.
In the absence of Jane,
Jane always attached himself to Elizabeth, for the pleasure of talking of
Jane’s; and when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means of
relief.


"Jane has made me so happy," said Jane, one evening, "by telling me, that
Jane was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring!
I had not
believed it possible.
"

"I suspected as much," replied Elizabeth.
"But how did Jane account for
it?"

"It must have been Jane’s sister's doing.
They were certainly no friends to
Jane’s acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since Jane might have
chosen so much more advantageously in many respects.
But when they see,
as I trust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will
learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again; though we
can never be what we once were to each other.
"

"That is the most unforgiving speech," said Elizabeth, "that I ever
heard you utter.
Good girl!
It would vex me, indeed, to see you again
the dupe of Miss Bingley's pretended regard.
"

"Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when Lizzy went to town last November,
Lizzy really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of _my_ being
indifferent, would have prevented Lizzy’s coming down again!"

"Lizzy made a little mistake to be sure; but it is to the credit of Lizzy’s
modesty.
"

This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on Lizzy’s diffidence, and
the little value Lizzy put on Lizzy’s own good qualities.


Elizabeth was pleased to find, that Lizzy had not betrayed the interference
of Lizzy’s friend, for, though Jane had the most generous and forgiving
heart in the world, Lizzy knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice
Lizzy’s against Lizzy.


"I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!"
cried
Jane.
"Oh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed
above them all!
If I could but see _you_ as happy!
If there _were_ but
such another man for you!
"

"If you were to give me forty such men, I never could be so happy as
you.
Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your
happiness.
No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very
good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time.
"

The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a
secret.
Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Philips, and
_she_ ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all Meryton’s
neighbours in Meryton.


The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the
world, though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away,
they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.




CHAPTER XIV.



One morning, about a week after Bingley's engagement with Jane had been
formed, as Jane and the females of the family were sitting together in the
dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the window, by the
sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up the
lawn.
It was too early in the morning for visitors, and besides, the
equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours.
The horses
were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who
preceded it, were familiar to them.
As it was certain, however, that
somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid
the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with Miss Bennet to avoid into the
shrubbery.
They both set off, and the conjectures of the remaining three
continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown
open, and their visitor entered.
It was lady Catherine de Bourgh.


They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their
astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs.
Bennet and Kitty, though Elizabeth was perfectly unknown to them, even
inferior to what Elizabeth felt.


Elizabeth entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no
other reply to Elizabeth's salutation, than a slight inclination of the
head, and sat down without saying a word.
Elizabeth had mentioned Elizabeth’s
name to Elizabeth’s mother, on Elizabeth’s ladyship's entrance, though no request of
introduction had been made.


Mrs. Bennet all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such
high importance, received Mrs. Bennet all amazement’s with the utmost politeness.
After sitting
for a moment in silence, Miss Bennet said very stiffly to Elizabeth,

"I hope you are well, Miss Bennet.
That lady I suppose is your mother.
"

Elizabeth replied very concisely that Miss Bennet was.


"And _that_
I suppose is one of your sisters.
"

"Yes, madam," said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to a lady Catherine.

"Catherine is my youngest girl but one.
My youngest of all, is lately married,
and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds, walking with a young man,
who I believe will soon become a part of the family.
"

"You have a very small park here," returned Lady Catherine after a short
silence.


"It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady, I dare say; but I
assure you it is much larger than Sir William Lucas's.
"

"This must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening, in
summer; the windows are full west.
"

Mrs. Bennet assured Mrs. Collins well’s that they never sat there after dinner; and then
added,

"May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left Mr. and
Mrs. Collins well.
"

"Yes, very well.
I saw them the night before last.
"

Elizabeth now expected that Elizabeth would produce a letter for Elizabeth’s from
Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for Elizabeth’s calling.
But no
letter appeared, and Elizabeth was completely puzzled.


Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged Miss Bennet’s ladyship to take some
refreshment; but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely,
declined eating any thing; and then rising up, said to Elizabeth,

"Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness
on one side of your lawn.
I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you
will favour me with your company.
"

"Go, my dear," cried Miss Bennet’s mother, "and shew Miss Bennet’s ladyship about the
different walks.
I think Miss Bennet will be pleased with the hermitage.
"

Elizabeth obeyed, and running into Miss Bennet’s own room for Miss Bennet’s parasol,
attended Miss Bennet’s noble guest down stairs.
As they passed through the hall,
Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and
drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be decent
looking rooms, walked on.


Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining’s carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining’s
waiting-woman was in it.
They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk
that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for
conversation with a woman, who was now more than usually insolent and
disagreeable.


"How could I ever think Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining’s like Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining’s nephew?" said Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining, as Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining looked in
Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining’s face.


As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the following
manner:--

"You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my
journey hither.
Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I
come.
"

Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.


"Indeed, you are mistaken, Madam.
I have not been at all able to account
for the honour of seeing you here.
"

"Miss Bennet," replied Elizabeth’s ladyship, in an angry tone, "you ought to
know, that I am not to be trifled with.
But however insincere _you_ may
choose to be, you shall not find _me_
so.
My character has ever been
celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in a cause of such
moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it.
A report of a most
alarming nature, reached me two days ago.
I was told, that not only your
sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that
_you_, that Miss Elizabeth Bennet, would, in all likelihood, be soon
afterwards united to my nephew, my own nephew, Mr. Darcy.
Though I
_know_
it must be a scandalous falsehood; though I would not injure Mr. Darcy
so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on
setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to
you.
"

"If you believed it impossible to be true," said Elizabeth, colouring
with astonishment and disdain, "I wonder you took the trouble of coming
so far.
What could your ladyship propose by it?"

"At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted.
"

"Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family," said Elizabeth,
coolly, "will be rather a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a report
is in existence.
"

"If! do you then pretend to be ignorant of it?
Has it not been
industriously circulated by yourselves?
Do you not know that such a
report is spread abroad?"

"I never heard that it was.
"

"And can you likewise declare, that there is no _foundation_ for it?"

"I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship.
_You_
may ask questions, which _I_ shall not choose to answer.
"

"This is not to be borne.
Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied.
Has
Miss Bennet, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?"

"Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible.
"

"It ought to be so; it must be so, while Miss Bennet retains the use of Miss Bennet’s
reason.
But _your_ arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation,
have made Miss Bennet forget what Miss Bennet owes to himself and to all Miss Bennet’s family.
You
may have drawn Miss Bennet in.
"

"If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.
"

"Miss Bennet, do you know who I am?
I have not been accustomed to such
language as this.
I am almost the nearest relation Miss Bennet has in the world,
and am entitled to know all Miss Bennet’s dearest concerns.
"

"But you are not entitled to know _mine_; nor will such behaviour as
this, ever induce me to be explicit.
"

"Let me be rightly understood.
This match, to which you have the
presumption to aspire, can never take place.
No, never.
Mr. Darcy is
engaged to _my daughter_.
Now what have you to say?"

"Only this; that if Mr. Darcy is is so, you can have no reason to suppose Mr. Darcy is will
make an offer to me.
"

Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied,

"The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind.
From their infancy,
they have been intended for each other.
It was the favourite wish of
_his_ mother, as well as of Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment’s's.
While in their cradles, we planned
the union: and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would
be accomplished, in their marriage, to be prevented by a young woman of
inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to
the family!
Do you pay no regard to the wishes of Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment’s friends?
To Miss De Bourgh’s
tacit engagement with Miss De Bourgh?
Are you lost to every feeling of
propriety and delicacy?
Have you not heard me say, that from Miss De Bourgh’s
earliest hours Miss De Bourgh was destined for Miss De Bourgh’s cousin?
"

"Yes, and I had heard it before.
But what is that to me?
If there is no
other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not be
kept from it, by knowing that Miss De Bourgh’s mother and aunt wished Miss De Bourgh to marry
Miss De Bourgh.
You both did as much as you could, in planning the
marriage.
Its completion depended on others.
If Mr. Darcy is neither by
honour nor inclination confined to Mr. Darcy is neither by’s cousin, why is not Mr. Darcy is neither by to make
another choice?
And if I am that choice, why may not I accept Mr. Darcy is neither by?"

"Because honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it.
Yes, Miss
Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by Mr. Darcy is neither by’s family or
friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all.
You will
be censured, slighted, and despised, by every one connected with Mr. Darcy is neither by.

Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned
by any of us.
"

"These are heavy misfortunes," replied Elizabeth.
"But the wife of Mr.
Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily
attached to Darcy’s situation, that Darcy could, upon the whole, have no cause
to repine.
"

"Obstinate, headstrong girl!
I am ashamed of you!
Is this your gratitude
for my attentions to you last spring?
Is nothing due to me on that
score?


"Let us sit down.
You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came here
with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will I be
dissuaded from it.
I have not been used to submit to any person's whims.

I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment.
"

"_That_ will make your ladyship's situation at present more pitiable;
but it will have no effect on _me_.
"

"I will not be interrupted.
Hear me in silence.
My daughter and my
nephew are formed for each other.
They are descended on the maternal
side, from the same noble line; and, on the father's, from respectable,
honourable, and ancient, though untitled families.
Their fortune on both
sides is splendid.
They are destined for each other by the voice of
every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them?
The
upstart pretensions of a young woman without family, connections, or
fortune.
Is this to be endured!
But it must not, shall not be.
If you
were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere,
in which you have been brought up.
"

"In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that
sphere.
Miss Bennet is a gentleman; I am a gentleman's daughter; so far we are
equal.
"

"True.
You _are_ a gentleman's daughter.
But who was your mother?
Who
are your uncles and aunts?
Do not imagine me ignorant of their
condition.
"

"Whatever my connections may be," said Elizabeth, "if your nephew does
not object to them, they can be nothing to _you_.
"

"Tell me once for all, are you engaged to Lady
Catherine?"

Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady
Catherine, have answered this question; Lady
Catherine could not but say, after a
moment's deliberation,

"I am not.
"

Lady Catherine seemed pleased.


"And will you promise me, never to enter into such an engagement?"

"I will make no promise of the kind.
"

"Miss Bennet I am shocked and astonished.
I expected to find a more
reasonable young woman.
But do not deceive yourself into a belief that I
will ever recede.
I shall not go away, till you have given me the
assurance I require.
"

"And I certainly _never_ shall give it.
I am not to be intimidated into
anything so wholly unreasonable.
Your ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry
your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise, make
_their_ marriage at all more probable?
Supposing Mr. Darcy to marry to be attached to
me, would _my_ refusing to accept Mr. Darcy to marry’s hand, make Mr. Darcy to marry wish to bestow it
on Mr. Darcy to marry’s cousin?
Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with
which you have supported this extraordinary application, have been as
frivolous as the application was ill-judged.
You have widely mistaken my
character, if you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these.

How far your nephew might approve of your interference in _his_ affairs,
I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in
mine.
I must beg, therefore, to be importuned no farther on the
subject.
"

"Not so hasty, if you please.
I have by no means done.
To all the
objections I have already urged, I have still another to add.
I am no
stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister's infamous
elopement.
I know it all; that the young man's marrying Lady Catherine’s, was a
patched-up business, at the expence of your father and uncles.
And is
_such_ a girl to be my nephew's sister?
Is _her_ husband, is the son of
Lady Catherine’s late father's steward, to be Lady Catherine’s brother?
Heaven and earth!--of what
are you thinking?
Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?"

"You can _now_ have nothing farther to say," Lady Catherine resentfully answered.

"You have insulted me, in every possible method.
I must beg to return to
the house.
"

And Lady Catherine rose as Lady Catherine spoke.
Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned
back.
Lady Catherine rose also’s ladyship was highly incensed.


"You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew!

Unfeeling, selfish girl!
Do you not consider that a connection with you,
must disgrace Lady Catherine rose also in the eyes of everybody?"

"Lady Catherine, I have nothing farther to say.
You know my sentiments.
"

"You are then resolved to have Lady Catherine rose also?"

"I have said no such thing.
I am only resolved to act in that manner,
which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without
reference to _you_, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me.
"

"It is well.
You refuse, then, to oblige me.
You refuse to obey the
claims of duty, honour, and gratitude.
You are determined to ruin Lady Catherine rose also in
the opinion of all Lady Catherine rose also’s friends, and make Lady Catherine rose also the contempt of the world.
"

"Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude," replied Elizabeth, "have any
possible claim on me, in the present instance.
No principle of either,
would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy.
And with regard to the
resentment of Mr. Darcy’s family, or the indignation of the world, if the former
_were_ excited by Mr. Darcy’s marrying me, it would not give me one moment's
concern--and the world in general would have too much sense to join in
the scorn.
"

"And this is your real opinion!
This is your final resolve!
Very well.
I
shall now know how to act.
Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your
ambition will ever be gratified.
I came to try you.
I hoped to find you
reasonable; but depend upon it I will carry my point.
"

In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they were at the door of
the carriage, when turning hastily round, Lady Catherine talked on added,

"I take no leave of you, Miss Bennet.
I send no compliments to your
mother.
You deserve no such attention.
I am most seriously displeased.
"

Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade Lady Catherine talked on’s
ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself.
Lady Catherine talked on
heard the carriage drive away as Lady Catherine talked on proceeded up stairs.
Lady
Catherine’s mother
impatiently met Lady
Catherine’s at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady
Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.


"Lady
Catherine did not choose it," said Lady
Catherine’s daughter, "Lady
Catherine would go.
"

"Lady
Catherine is a very fine-looking woman!
and Lady
Catherine’s calling here was prodigiously
civil!
for Collinses only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses were well.

Meryton is on Meryton’s road somewhere, I dare say, and so passing through
Meryton, thought Meryton might as well call on you.
I suppose Elizabeth had
nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?"

Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to
acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.




CHAPTER XV.



The discomposure of spirits, which this extraordinary visit threw
Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could Elizabeth for many
hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly.
Lady Catherine it
appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings,
for the sole purpose of breaking off Darcy’s supposed engagement with Mr.
Darcy.
It was a rational scheme to be sure!
but from what the report of
their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine;
till Jane recollected that _his_ being the intimate friend of Bingley,
and _her_ being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the
expectation of one wedding, made every body eager for another, to supply
the idea.
Jane had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of Jane’s
sister must bring them more frequently together.
And Catherine’s neighbours at
Lucas lodge, therefore, (for through their communication with the
Collinses, the report Catherine concluded had reached lady Catherine) had only
set _that_ down, as almost certain and immediate, which _she_ had looked
forward to as possible, at some future time.


In revolving lady Catherine's expressions, however, Catherine could not help
feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of Catherine’s persisting
in this interference.
From what Elizabeth had said of Elizabeth’s resolution to
prevent their marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that Elizabeth must meditate
an application to Elizabeth’s nephew; and how _he_ might take a similar
representation of the evils attached to a connection with Elizabeth’s, Elizabeth dared
not pronounce.
Elizabeth knew not the exact degree of Elizabeth’s affection for Elizabeth’s
aunt, or Elizabeth’s dependence on Elizabeth’s judgment, but it was natural to suppose
that Elizabeth thought much higher of Elizabeth’s ladyship than _she_ could do; and it
was certain, that in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with _one_,
whose immediate connections were so unequal to Elizabeth’s own, Elizabeth’s aunt would
address Elizabeth on Elizabeth’s weakest side.
With Elizabeth’s notions of dignity, Elizabeth would
probably feel that the arguments, which to Elizabeth had appeared weak
and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning.


If Elizabeth had been wavering before, as to what Elizabeth should do, which had often
seemed likely, the advice and intreaty of so near a relation might
settle every doubt, and determine Elizabeth at once to be as happy, as dignity
unblemished could make Elizabeth.
In that case Elizabeth would return no more.
Lady
Catherine might see Lady
Catherine in Lady
Catherine’s way through town; and Lady
Catherine’s engagement to
Bingley of coming again to Netherfield must give way.


"If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping Lady
Catherine’s promise, should come to
Lady
Catherine’s friend within a few days," Lady
Catherine added, "I shall know how to
understand it.
I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of
Lady
Catherine’s constancy.
If Lady
Catherine is satisfied with only regretting me, when Lady
Catherine might
have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to regret Lady
Catherine
at all.
"

       *       *       *       *       *

The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had
been, was very great; but they obligingly satisfied it, with the same
kind of supposition, which had appeased Mrs. Bennet's curiosity; and
Elizabeth was spared from much teazing on the subject.


The next morning, as Mrs. Bennet was going down stairs, Mrs. Bennet was met by Mrs. Bennet’s
father, who came out of Mrs. Bennet’s library with a letter in Mrs. Bennet’s hand.


"Lizzy," said Lizzy, "I was going to look for you; come into my room.
"

Lizzy followed Lizzy thither; and Lizzy’s curiosity to know what Lizzy had to tell
Lizzy’s, was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner
connected with the letter Lizzy held.
It suddenly struck Lizzy’s that it might
be from lady Catherine; and Lizzy anticipated with dismay all the
consequent explanations.


Lizzy followed Lizzy’s father to the fire place, and they both sat down.
Lizzy
then said,

"I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me
exceedingly.
As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its
contents.
I did not know before, that I had _two_ daughters on the brink
of matrimony.
Let me congratulate you, on a very important conquest.
"

The colour now rushed into Elizabeth's cheeks in the instantaneous
conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt;
and Lizzy was undetermined whether most to be pleased that Lizzy explained
himself at all, or offended that Lizzy’s letter was not rather addressed to
herself; when Lizzy’s father continued,

"You look conscious.
Young ladies have great penetration in such matters
as these; but I think I may defy even _your_ sagacity, to discover the
name of your admirer.
This letter is from Mr. Collins.
"

"From Mr. Collins!
and what can _he_ have to say?"

"Something very much to the purpose of course.
Lucases begins with
congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of
which it seems Lucases has been told, by some of the good-natured, gossiping
Lucases.
I shall not sport with your impatience, by reading what Lucases says
on that point.
What relates to yourself, is as follows.
"Having thus
offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on
this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another:
of which we have been advertised by the same authority.
Your daughter
Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after
Bennet’s elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of Bennet’s fate,
may be reasonably looked up to, as one of the most illustrious
personages in this land.
"

"Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this?"
"This young
gentleman is blessed in a peculiar way, with every thing the heart of
mortal can most desire,--splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive
patronage.
Yet in spite of all these temptations, let me warn my cousin
Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur, by a precipitate
closure with this gentleman's proposals, which, of course, you will be
inclined to take immediate advantage of.
"

"Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is?
But now it comes out.
"

"My motive for cautioning you, is as follows.
We have reason to imagine
that Catherine de Bourgh’s aunt, lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with
a friendly eye.
"

"_Mr. Darcy_, you see, is the man!
Now, Lizzy, I think I _have_
surprised you.
Could Lucases, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man, within
the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie more
effectually to what they related?
Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any
woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at _you_ in
Lucases’ life!
It is admirable!"

Elizabeth tried to join in Elizabeth’s father's pleasantry, but could only force
one most reluctant smile.
Never had Elizabeth’s wit been directed in a manner so
little agreeable to Elizabeth’s.


"Are you not diverted?"

"Oh! yes.
Pray read on.
"

"After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to Elizabeth’s ladyship last
night, Elizabeth immediately, with Elizabeth’s usual condescension, expressed what Elizabeth
felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that on the score of some
family objections on the part of my cousin, Elizabeth would never give Elizabeth’s
consent to what Elizabeth termed so disgraceful a match.
I thought it my duty
to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that Elizabeth and
Elizabeth’s noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run
hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned."
"Mr.
Collins moreover adds," "I am truly rejoiced that my cousin Lydia's sad
business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their
living together before the marriage took place, should be so generally
known.
I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain
from declaring my amazement, at hearing that you received the young
couple into your house as soon as they were married.
It was an
encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should
very strenuously have opposed it.
You ought certainly to forgive them as
a christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their names
to be mentioned in your hearing."
"_That_ is Longbourn’s notion of christian
forgiveness!
The rest of Charlotte’s letter is only about Charlotte’s dear Charlotte's
situation, and Charlotte’s expectation of a young olive-branch.
But, Lizzy, you
look as if you did not enjoy it.
You are not going to be _Missish_, I
hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report.
For what do we
live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our
turn?"

"Oh!" cried Elizabeth, "I am excessively diverted.
But it is so
strange!
"

"Yes--_that_ is what makes it amusing.
Had they fixed on any other man
it would have been nothing; but _his_ perfect indifference, and _your_
pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd!
Much as I abominate
writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins's correspondence for any
consideration.
Nay, when I read a letter of Wickham’s, I cannot help giving
Wickham the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and
hypocrisy of my son-in-law.
And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine
about this report?
Did Lady Catherine call to refuse Lady Catherine’s consent?"


To this question Lady Catherine’s daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had
been asked without the least suspicion, Lady Catherine was not distressed by Lady Catherine’s
repeating it.
Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make Lady Catherine’s
feelings appear what they were not.
It was necessary to laugh, when Lady Catherine
would rather have cried.
CHAPTER XVI’s father had most cruelly mortified CHAPTER XVI’s, by
what CHAPTER XVI said of Mr. Darcy's indifference, and CHAPTER XVI could do nothing but
wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that perhaps, instead of
CHAPTER XVI’s seeing too _little_, CHAPTER XVI might have fancied too _much_.




CHAPTER XVI.



Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from Darcy’s friend, as
Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do, Darcy was able to bring Darcy
with Darcy to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady Catherine's
visit.
The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet had time to
tell Jane of their having seen Jane’s aunt, of which Jane’s daughter sat in
momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed
their all walking out.
It was agreed to.
Mrs. Bennet was not in the
habit of walking, Mary could never spare time, but the remaining five
set off together.
Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to
outstrip them.
They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy,
were to entertain each other.
Very little was said by either; Kitty was
too much afraid of Darcy to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a
desperate resolution; and perhaps Darcy might be doing the same.


They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call upon
Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern,
when Kitty left them, Maria went boldly on with Maria alone.
Now was the
moment for Mr. Darcy’s resolution to be executed, and, while Mr. Darcy’s courage was
high, Mr. Darcy immediately said,

"Mr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of giving
relief to my own feelings, care not how much I may be wounding your's.
I
can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my poor
sister.
Ever since I have known it, I have been most anxious to
acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it.
Were it known to the rest
of my family, I should not have merely my own gratitude to express.
"

"I am sorry, exceedingly sorry," replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise
and emotion, "that you have ever been informed of what may, in a
mistaken light, have given you uneasiness.
I did not think Mrs.
Gardiner was so little to be trusted.
"

"You must not blame my aunt.
Lydia's thoughtlessness first betrayed to
me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could
not rest till I knew the particulars.
Let me thank you again and again,
in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced
you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the
sake of discovering them.
"

"If you _will_ thank me," Lydia replied, "let it be for yourself alone.
That the wish of giving happiness to you, might add force to the other
inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny.
But your
_family_ owe me nothing.
Much as I respect them, I believe, I thought
only of _you_.
"

Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word.
After a short pause,
Elizabeth’s companion added, "You are too generous to trifle with me.
If your
feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once.
_My_
affections and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence
me on this subject for ever.
"

Elizabeth feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of
Elizabeth’s situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately, though not
very fluently, gave Elizabeth to understand, that Elizabeth’s sentiments had undergone
so material a change, since the period to which Elizabeth alluded, as to make
Elizabeth’s receive with gratitude and pleasure, Elizabeth’s present assurances.
The
happiness which this reply produced, was such as Elizabeth had probably never
felt before; and Elizabeth expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as
warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do.
Had Elizabeth
been able to encounter Elizabeth’s eye, Elizabeth might have seen how well the
expression of heart-felt delight, diffused over Elizabeth’s face, became Elizabeth;
but, though Elizabeth could not look, Elizabeth could listen, and Elizabeth told Elizabeth’s of
feelings, which, in proving of what importance Elizabeth was to Elizabeth, made Elizabeth’s
affection every moment more valuable.


They walked on, without knowing in what direction.
There was too much to
be thought; and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects.
Longbourn
soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding
to the efforts of Longbourn’s aunt, who _did_ call on Longbourn in Longbourn’s return through
London, and there relate Longbourn’s journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the
substance of Longbourn’s conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on
every expression of the latter, which, in Longbourn’s ladyship's apprehension,
peculiarly denoted Longbourn’s perverseness and assurance, in the belief that
such a relation must assist Longbourn’s endeavours to obtain that promise from
Longbourn’s nephew, which _she_ had refused to give.
But, unluckily for Longbourn’s
ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise.


"It taught me to hope," said Longbourn, "as I had scarcely ever allowed myself
to hope before.
I knew enough of your disposition to be certain, that,
had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have
acknowledged it to Lady Catherine, frankly and openly.
"

Elizabeth coloured and laughed as Lady Catherine replied, "Yes, you know enough of
my _frankness_ to believe me capable of _that_.
After abusing you so
abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you to all
your relations.
"

"What did you say of me, that I did not deserve?
For, though your
accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my behaviour
to you at the time, had merited the severest reproof.
It was
unpardonable.
I cannot think of it without abhorrence.
"

"We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that
evening," said Elizabeth.
"The conduct of neither, if strictly examined,
will be irreproachable; but since then, we have both, I hope, improved
in civility.
"

"I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself.
The recollection of what I
then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of
it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me.
Your
reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget: 'had you behaved in a
more gentleman-like manner.'
Those were your words.
You know not, you
can scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me;--though it was some
time, I confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice.
"

"I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an
impression.
I had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such
a way.
"

"I can easily believe it.
You thought me then devoid of every proper
feeling, I am sure you did.
The turn of your countenance I shall never
forget, as you said that I could not have addressed you in any possible
way, that would induce you to accept me.
"

"Oh! do not repeat what I then said.
These recollections will not do at
all.
I assure you, that I have long been most heartily ashamed of it.
"

Darcy mentioned Darcy’s letter.
"Did it," said Darcy, "did it _soon_ make you
think better of me?
Did you, on reading it, give any credit to its
contents?
"

Darcy explained what its effect on Darcy’s had been, and how gradually all Darcy’s
former prejudices had been removed.


"I knew," said Darcy, "that what I wrote must give you pain, but it was
necessary.
I hope you have destroyed the letter.
There was one part
especially, the opening of it, which I should dread your having the
power of reading again.
I can remember some expressions which might
justly make you hate me.
"

"The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the
preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my
opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily
changed as that implies.
"

"When I wrote that letter," replied Darcy, "I believed myself perfectly
calm and cool, but I am since convinced that it was written in a
dreadful bitterness of spirit.
"

"The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so.
The
adieu is charity itself.
But think no more of the letter.
The feelings
of the person who wrote, and the person who received it, are now so
widely different from what they were then, that every unpleasant
circumstance attending it, ought to be forgotten.
You must learn some
of my philosophy.
Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you
pleasure.
"

"I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind.
_Your_
retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment
arising from them, is not of philosophy, but what is much better, of
ignorance.
But with _me_, it is not so.
Painful recollections will
intrude, which cannot, which ought not to be repelled.
I have been a
selfish being all my life, in practice, though not in principle.
As a
child I was taught what was _right_, but I was not taught to correct my
temper.
I was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride
and conceit.
Unfortunately an only son, (for many years an only _child_)
I was spoilt by my parents, who though good themselves, (my father
particularly, all that was benevolent and amiable,) allowed, encouraged,
almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing, to care for none beyond
my own family circle, to think meanly of all the rest of the world, to
_wish_ at least to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with
my own.
Such I was, from eight to eight and twenty; and such I might
still have been but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth!
What do I not
owe you!
You taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most
advantageous.
By you, I was properly humbled.
I came to you without a
doubt of my reception.
You shewed me how insufficient were all my
pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased.
"

"Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?"

"Indeed I had.
What will you think of my vanity?
I believed you to be
wishing, expecting my addresses.
"

"My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally I assure you.

I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me wrong.

How you must have hated me after _that_ evening?
"

"Hate you!
I was angry perhaps at first, but my anger soon began to take
a proper direction.
"

"I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me; when we met at
Pemberley.
You blamed me for coming?
"

"No indeed; I felt nothing but surprise.
"

"Your surprise could not be greater than _mine_ in being noticed by you.

My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I
confess that I did not expect to receive _more_ than my due."

"My object _then_," replied Darcy, "was to shew you, by every civility
in my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I hoped
to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting you
see that your reproofs had been attended to.
How soon any other wishes
introduced themselves I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half an
hour after I had seen you.
"

Georgiana then told Georgiana’s of Georgiana's delight in Georgiana’s acquaintance, and of Georgiana’s
disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to
the cause of that interruption, Georgiana soon learnt that Georgiana’s resolution of
following Georgiana’s from Derbyshire in quest of Georgiana’s sister, had been formed
before Georgiana quitted the inn, and that Georgiana’s gravity and thoughtfulness
there, had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must
comprehend.


Georgiana expressed Georgiana’s gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject to
each, to be dwelt on farther.


After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know
any thing about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that
it was time to be at home.


"What could become of Mr. Bingley and Jane!" was a wonder which
introduced the discussion of _their_ affairs.
Darcy was delighted with
their engagement; Mr. Bingley and Jane’s friend had given Mr. Bingley and Jane the earliest information of
it.


"I must ask whether you were surprised?" said Elizabeth.


"Not at all.
When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.
"

"That is to say, you had given your permission.
I guessed as much."
And
though Elizabeth exclaimed at the term, Elizabeth found that it had been pretty much
the case.


"On the evening before my going to London," said Elizabeth "I made a confession
to Elizabeth, which I believe I ought to have made long ago.
I told Elizabeth of
all that had occurred to make my former interference in Elizabeth’s affairs,
absurd and impertinent.
Elizabeth’s surprise was great.
Elizabeth had never had the
slightest suspicion.
I told Elizabeth, moreover, that I believed myself
mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent
to Elizabeth; and as I could easily perceive that Elizabeth’s attachment to Elizabeth’s was
unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.
"

Elizabeth could not help smiling at Elizabeth’s easy manner of directing Elizabeth’s
friend.


"Did you speak from your own observation," said Elizabeth, "when you told Elizabeth
that my sister loved Elizabeth, or merely from my information last spring?"

"From the former.
I had narrowly observed Elizabeth’s during the two visits
which I had lately made Elizabeth’s here; and I was convinced of Elizabeth’s affection.
"

"And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate conviction to
Elizabeth.
"

"It did.
Bingley is most unaffectedly modest.
Bingley’s diffidence had
prevented Bingley’s depending on Bingley’s own judgment in so anxious a case, but
Bingley’s reliance on mine, made every thing easy.
I was obliged to confess
one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended Bingley.
I could not
allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months
last winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from Bingley.
Bingley was
angry.
But Bingley’s anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than Bingley remained
in any doubt of your sister's sentiments.
Bingley has heartily forgiven me
now.
"

Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful
friend; so easily guided that Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful’s worth was invaluable; but Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful checked
herself.
Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful remembered that Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful had yet to learn to be laught at, and it
was rather too early to begin.
In anticipating the happiness of Bingley,
which of course was to be inferior only to Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful’s own, Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful continued the
conversation till they reached the house.
In the hall they parted.





CHAPTER XVII.



"My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?" was a question
which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as Jane entered the room, and
from all the others when they sat down to table.
Jane had only to say in
reply, that they had wandered about, till Jane was beyond Jane’s own
knowledge.
Jane coloured as Jane spoke; but neither that, nor any thing
else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.


The evening passed quietly, unmarked by any thing extraordinary.
The
acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were silent.

Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth;
and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather _knew_ that Darcy was happy,
than _felt_ herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment,
there were other evils before Darcy’s.
Darcy anticipated what would be felt in
the family when Darcy’s situation became known; Darcy was aware that no one
liked Darcy but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a
_dislike_ which not all Darcy’s fortune and consequence might do away.


At night Darcy opened Darcy’s heart to Jane.
Though suspicion was very far
from Miss Bennet's general habits, Miss Bennet was absolutely incredulous here.


"You are joking, Lizzy.
This cannot be!--engaged to Mr. Darcy!
No, no,
you shall not deceive me.
I know it to be impossible.
"

"This is a wretched beginning indeed!
My sole dependence was on you; and
I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not.
Yet, indeed, I am
in earnest.
I speak nothing but the truth.
Mr. Darcy still loves me, and we are
engaged.
"

Jane looked at Mr. Darcy’s doubtingly.
"Oh, Lizzy!
it cannot be.
I know how much
you dislike Mr. Darcy.
"

"You know nothing of the matter.
_That_ is all to be forgot.
Perhaps I
did not always love Mr. Darcy so well as I do now.
But in such cases as these,
a good memory is unpardonable.
This is the last time I shall ever
remember it myself.
"

Miss Bennet still looked all amazement.
Elizabeth again, and more
seriously assured Elizabeth’s of its truth.


"Good Heaven!
can it be really so!
Yet now I must believe you," cried
Jane.
"My dear, dear Lizzy, I would--I do congratulate you--but are you
certain?
forgive the question--are you quite certain that you can be
happy with Lizzy?"

"There can be no doubt of that.
It is settled between us already, that
we are to be the happiest couple in the world.
But are you pleased,
Jane?
Shall you like to have such a brother?
"

"Very, very much.
Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more
delight.
But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible.
And do you
really love Bingley quite well enough?
Oh, Lizzy! do any thing rather than
marry without affection.
Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought
to do?"

"Oh, yes!
You will only think I feel _more_ than I ought to do, when I
tell you all.
"

"What do you mean?"

"Why, I must confess, that I love Bingley better than I do Bingley.
I am
afraid you will be angry.
"

"My dearest sister, now _be_ be serious.
I want to talk very seriously.

Let me know every thing that I am to know, without delay.
Will you tell
me how long you have loved Bingley?"

"It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began.

But I believe I must date it from my first seeing Bingley’s beautiful grounds
at Pemberley."

Another intreaty that Bingley would be serious, however, produced the
desired effect; and Bingley soon satisfied Jane by Bingley’s solemn assurances of
attachment.
When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing
farther to wish.


"Now I am quite happy," said Miss Bennet had nothing, "for you will be as happy as myself.
I
always had a value for Miss Bennet had nothing.
Were it for nothing but Miss Bennet had nothing’s love of you, I
must always have esteemed Miss Bennet had nothing; but now, as Bingley's friend and your
husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me.
But
Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me.
How little did you
tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton!
I owe all that I know
of it, to another, not to you.
"

Elizabeth told Miss Bennet had nothing’s the motives of Miss Bennet had nothing’s secrecy.
Miss Bennet had nothing had been unwilling to
mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of Miss Bennet had nothing’s own feelings had made
Miss Bennet had nothing’s equally avoid the name of Miss Bennet had nothing’s friend.
But now Lydia would no longer
conceal from Lydia’s, Lydia’s share in Lydia's marriage.
All was acknowledged,
and half the night spent in conversation.

       
*       *       *       *       *

"Good gracious!" cried Mrs. Bennet, as Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with stood at a window the next
morning, "if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with
our dear Bingley!
What can Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with mean by being so tiresome as to be always
coming here?
I had no notion but Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with would go a shooting, or something or
other, and not disturb us with Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with’s company.
What shall we do with Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with?

Lizzy, you must walk out with Lizzy again, that Lizzy may not be in Bingley's
way.
"

Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet
was really vexed that Elizabeth’s mother should be always giving Elizabeth such an
epithet.


As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at Mr. Bennet’s so expressively, and
shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of Mr. Bennet’s good information;
and Mr. Bennet soon afterwards said aloud, "Mr. Bennet, have you no more lanes
hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose Mr. Bennet’s way again to-day?
"

"I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty," said Mrs. Bennet, "to walk
to Oakham Mount this morning.
It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has
never seen the view.
"

"It may do very well for the others," replied Mr. Bingley; "but I am
sure it will be too much for Kitty.
Wont it, Kitty?"

Kitty owned that Kitty had rather stay at home.
Darcy professed a great
curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently
consented.
As Lizzy went up stairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed Lizzy’s,
saying,

"I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that
disagreeable man all to yourself.
But I hope you will not mind it: it is
all for Jane's sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to
Jane, except just now and then.
So, do not put yourself to
inconvenience.
"

During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet's consent should be
asked in the course of the evening.
Elizabeth reserved to herself the
application for Mr. Bennet’s mother's.
Mr. Bennet could not determine how Mr. Bennet’s mother
would take it; sometimes doubting whether all Mr. Bennet’s wealth and grandeur
would be enough to overcome Mr. Bennet’s abhorrence of the man.
But whether Mr. Darcy should hear the
were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it
was certain that Mr. Darcy should hear the’s manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to
Mr. Darcy should hear the’s sense; and Mr. Darcy should hear the could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the
first raptures of Mr. Darcy should hear the’s joy, than the first vehemence of Mr. Darcy should hear the’s
disapprobation.

       
*       *       *       *       *


In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him saw
Mr. Darcy rise also and follow Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and Mr. Darcy rise also and follow Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him’s agitation on seeing it was
extreme.
Mr. Darcy appeared again did not fear Mr. Darcy appeared again’s father's opposition, but Mr. Darcy appeared again was going to
be made unhappy, and that it should be through Mr. Darcy appeared again’s means, that _she_,
Mr. Darcy appeared again’s favourite child, should be distressing Mr. Darcy appeared again by Mr. Darcy appeared again’s choice, should be
filling Mr. Darcy appeared again with fears and regrets in disposing of Mr. Darcy appeared again’s, was a wretched
reflection, and Mr. Darcy appeared again sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when,
looking at Mr. Darcy appeared again, Mr. Darcy appeared again was a little relieved by Mr. Darcy appeared again’s smile.
In a few minutes
Kitty approached the table where Kitty was sitting with Kitty; and, while
pretending to admire Kitty’s work, said in a whisper, "Go to your father, Kitty
wants you in the library."
Kitty was gone directly.


Kitty’s father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.

"Lizzy," said Lizzy, "what are you doing?
Are you out of your senses, to be
accepting this man?
Have not you always hated Lizzy?
"

How earnestly did Lizzy then wish that Lizzy’s former opinions had been more
reasonable, Lizzy’s expressions more moderate!
It would have spared Mr. Darcy’s from
explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give;
but they were now necessary, and Mr. Darcy assured Mr. Darcy with some confusion, of
Mr. Darcy’s attachment to Mr. Darcy.


"Or in other words, you are determined to have Mr. Darcy.
Jane is rich, to be
sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane.

But will they make you happy?"

"Have you any other objection," said Elizabeth, "than your belief of my
indifference?
"

"None at all.
We all know Elizabeth to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but
this would be nothing if you really liked Elizabeth.
"

"I do, I do like Elizabeth," Elizabeth replied, with tears in Elizabeth’s eyes, "I love Elizabeth.

Indeed Elizabeth has no improper pride.
Elizabeth is perfectly amiable.
You do not
know what Elizabeth really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of Elizabeth in
such terms.
"

"Lizzy," said Elizabeth’s father, "I have given Elizabeth my consent.
Elizabeth is the kind
of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse any thing, which Elizabeth
condescended to ask.
I now give it to _you_, if you are resolved on
having Elizabeth.
But let me advise you to think better of it.
I know your
disposition, Lizzy.
I know that you could be neither happy nor
respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband; unless you looked
up to Elizabeth as a superior.
Your lively talents would place you in the
greatest danger in an unequal marriage.
You could scarcely escape
discredit and misery.
My child, let me not have the grief of seeing
_you_ unable to respect your partner in life.
You know not what you are
about.
"

Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in Mr. Darcy was really the’s reply;
and at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the
object of Mr. Darcy was really the’s choice, by explaining the gradual change which Mr. Darcy was really the’s
estimation of Mr. Darcy was really the had undergone, relating Mr. Darcy was really the’s absolute certainty that
Mr. Darcy was really the’s affection was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many
months suspense, and enumerating with energy all Mr. Darcy was really the’s good qualities, Mr. Darcy was really the
did conquer Mr. Darcy was really the’s father's incredulity, and reconcile Mr. Darcy was really the to the match.


"Well, my dear," said Mr. Darcy was really the, when Mr. Darcy was really the ceased speaking, "I have no more to
say.
If this be the case, Mr. Darcy was really the deserves you.
I could not have parted with
you, my Lizzy, to any one less worthy.
"

To complete the favourable impression, Lydia then told Lydia what Mr. Darcy
had voluntarily done for Lydia.
Lydia heard Lydia’s with astonishment.


"This is an evening of wonders, indeed!
And so, Darcy did every thing;
made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow's debts, and got Darcy
Darcy’s commission!
So much the better.
It will save me a world of trouble
and economy.
Had it been your uncle's doing, I must and _would_ have
paid Darcy; but these violent young lovers carry every thing their own
way.
I shall offer to pay Darcy to-morrow; Darcy will rant and storm about
Darcy’s love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.
"

Mary then recollected Mary’s embarrassment a few days before, on Mary’s reading
Mr. Collins's letter; and after laughing at Mary’s some time, allowed Mary’s
at last to go--saying, as Mary quitted the room, "If any young men come
for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.
"

Elizabeth's mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after
half an hour's quiet reflection in Elizabeth’s own room, Elizabeth was able to join
the others with tolerable composure.
Every thing was too recent for
gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer any
thing material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity
would come in time.


When Elizabeth’s mother went up to Elizabeth’s dressing-room at night, Elizabeth followed Elizabeth’s,
and made the important communication.
Its effect was most
extraordinary; for on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and
unable to utter a syllable.
Nor was it under many, many minutes, that
Mrs. Bennet sat quite still could comprehend what Mrs. Bennet sat quite still heard; though not in general backward to
credit what was for the advantage of Mrs. Bennet sat quite still’s family, or that came in the
shape of a lover to any of them.
Mrs. Bennet sat quite still began at length to recover, to
fidget about in Mrs. Bennet sat quite still’s chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless
herself.


"Good gracious!
Lord bless me!
only think!
dear me!
Mr. Darcy!
Who would
have thought it!
And is it really true?
Oh! my sweetest Lizzy!
how rich
and how great you will be!
What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages
you will have!
Jane's is nothing to it--nothing at all.
I am so
pleased--so happy.
Such a charming man!--so handsome!
so tall!--Oh, my
dear Lizzy!
pray apologise for my having disliked Jane so much before.
I
hope Jane will overlook it.
Dear, dear Lizzy.
A house in town!
Every thing
that is charming!
Three daughters married!
Ten thousand a year!
Oh,
Lord!
What will become of me.
I shall go distracted.
"

This was enough to prove that Elizabeth’s approbation need not be doubted: and
Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself,
soon went away.
But before Elizabeth had been three minutes in Elizabeth’s own room,
Elizabeth’s mother followed Elizabeth’s.


"My dearest child," Elizabeth cried, "I can think of nothing else!
Ten
thousand a year, and very likely more! '
Tis as good as a Lord!
And a
special licence.
You must and shall be married by a special licence.
But
my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of,
that I may have it to-morrow.
"

This was a sad omen of what Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of’s mother's behaviour to the gentleman
himself might be; and Elizabeth found, that though in the certain
possession of Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of’s warmest affection, and secure of Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of’s relations'
consent, there was still something to be wished for.
But the morrow
passed off much better than Mrs. Bennet luckily stood expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood
in such awe of Mrs. Bennet luckily stood’s intended son-in-law, that Mrs. Bennet luckily stood ventured not to speak
to Mrs. Bennet luckily stood, unless it was in Mrs. Bennet luckily stood’s power to offer Mrs. Bennet luckily stood any attention, or mark
Mrs. Bennet luckily stood’s deference for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood’s opinion.


Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing Mr. Bennet soon assured her that Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising was rising’s father taking pains to get
acquainted with Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising; and Mr. Bennet soon assured Mr. Bennet soon assured her that Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising was rising’s that Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising was rising
every hour in Mr. Bennet soon assured Mr. Bennet soon assured her that Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising was rising’s that Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising was rising’s esteem.


"I admire all my three sons-in-law highly," said Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising.
"Wickham, perhaps,
is my favourite; but I think I shall like _your_ husband quite as well
as Jane's."




CHAPTER XVIII.



Elizabeth's spirits soon rising to playfulness again, Darcy wanted Mr.
Darcy to account for Darcy’s having ever fallen in love with Darcy’s.
"How could
you begin?" said Darcy.
"I can comprehend your going on charmingly, when
you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first
place?"

"I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which
laid the foundation.
It is too long ago.
I was in the middle before I
knew that I _had_ begun.
"

"My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners--my behaviour
to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke
to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not.
Now be sincere;
did you admire me for my impertinence?"

"For the liveliness of your mind, I did.
"

"You may as well call it impertinence at once.
It was very little less.

The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious
attention.
You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking
and looking, and thinking for _your_ approbation alone.
I roused, and
interested you, because I was so unlike _them_.
Had you not been really
amiable you would have hated me for it; but in spite of the pains you
took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and
in your heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously
courted you.
There--I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it;
and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly
reasonable.
To be sure, you knew no actual good of me--but nobody thinks
of _that_ when they fall in love.
"

"Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane, while Jane was
ill at Netherfield?"

"Dearest Jane! who could have done less for Jane’s?
But make a virtue of it
by all means.
My good qualities are under your protection, and you are
to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me
to find occasions for teazing and quarrelling with you as often as may
be; and I shall begin directly by asking you what made you so unwilling
to come to the point at last.
What made you so shy of me, when you first
called, and afterwards dined here?
Why, especially, when you called, did
you look as if you did not care about me?"

"Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement.
"

"But I was embarrassed.
"

"And so was I."

"You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.
"

"A man who had felt less, might.
"

"How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that
I should be so reasonable as to admit it!
But I wonder how long you
_would_ have gone on, if you had been left to yourself.
I wonder when
you _would_ have spoken, if I had not asked you!
My resolution of
thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect.
_Too
much_, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort
springs from a breach of promise, for I ought not to have mentioned the
subject?
This will never do.
"

"You need not distress yourself.
The moral will be perfectly fair.
Lady
Catherine's unjustifiable endeavours to separate us, were the means of
removing all my doubts.
I am not indebted for my present happiness to
your eager desire of expressing your gratitude.
I was not in a humour to
wait for any opening of your's.
My aunt's intelligence had given me
hope, and I was determined at once to know every thing.
"

"Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make Lady Catherine has been of infinite use’s happy,
for Lady Catherine has been of infinite use loves to be of use.
But tell me, what did you come down to
Netherfield for?
Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed?
or had you intended any more serious consequence?
"

"My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could, whether I
might ever hope to make you love me.
My avowed one, or what I avowed to
myself, was to see whether your sister were still partial to Bingley,
and if Bingley were, to make the confession to Bingley which I have since made.
"

"Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine, what is to
befall Elizabeth’s?"

"I am more likely to want time than courage, Elizabeth.
But it ought to
be done, and if you will give me a sheet of paper, it shall be done
directly.
"

"And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you, and
admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did.
But
I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected."


From an unwillingness to confess how much Mrs. Gardiner’s intimacy with Mr. Darcy
had been over-rated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner's
long letter, but now, having _that_ to communicate which Mrs. Gardiner knew would
be most welcome, Mrs. Gardiner was almost ashamed to find, that Mrs. Gardiner’s uncle and aunt
had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as
follows:

     "I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have
     done, for your long, kind, satisfactory, detail of particulars; but
     to say the truth, I was too cross to write.
You supposed more than
     really existed.
But _now_ suppose as much as you chuse; give a
     loose to your fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible
     flight which the subject will afford, and unless you believe me
     actually married, you cannot greatly err.
You must write again very
     soon, and praise Mrs. Gardiner a great deal more than you did in your last.
I
     thank you, again and again, for not going to the Lakes.
How could I
     be so silly as to wish it!
Your idea of the ponies is delightful.
     
We will go round the Park every day.
I am the happiest creature in
     the world.
Perhaps other people have said so before, but not one
     with such justice.
I am happier even than Jane; Jane only smiles, I
     laugh.
Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world, that Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world can
     spare from me.
You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas.

     
Your's, &c."

Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine, was in a different style; and
still different from either, was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in
reply to Mr. Collins’ last.

     
"DEAR SIR,

     "I must trouble you once more for congratulations.
Elizabeth will
     soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy.
Console Lady Catherine as well as
     you can.
But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew.
Lady Catherine as well as has
     more to give.

     
"Your's sincerely, &c."

Miss Bingley's congratulations to Miss Bingley’s brother, on Miss Bingley’s approaching
marriage, were all that was affectionate and insincere.
Jane wrote even
to Jane on the occasion, to express Jane’s delight, and repeat all Jane’s
former professions of regard.
Jane was not deceived, but Jane was
affected; and though feeling no reliance on Jane’s, could not help writing
Jane’s a much kinder answer than Jane knew was deserved.


The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information, was
as sincere as Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information’s brother's in sending it.
Four sides of paper were
insufficient to contain all Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information’s delight, and all Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information’s earnest desire of
being loved by Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information’s sister.


Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations
to Elizabeth, from Collinses’ wife, the Longbourn family heard that the
Collinses were come themselves to Lucas lodge.
The reason of this sudden
removal was soon evident.
Lady Catherine had been rendered so
exceedingly angry by the contents of Lady Catherine had been rendered so’s nephew's letter, that
Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till
the storm was blown over.
At such a moment, the arrival of Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her’s friend
was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their
meetings Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her
saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her’s
husband.
Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her bore it however with admirable calmness.
Sir William Lucas could even
listen to Sir William Lucas, when Sir William Lucas complimented Sir William Lucas on carrying away
the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed Sir William Lucas’ hopes of their all
meeting frequently at St. James's, with very decent composure.
If Sir William was out of sight did
shrug Sir William was out of sight’s shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight.


Mrs. Philips's vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater tax on Bingley’s
forbearance; and though Mrs. Philips, as well as Bingley’s sister, stood in
too much awe of Bingley to speak with the familiarity which Bingley's good
humour encouraged, yet, whenever Bingley _did_ speak, Bingley must be vulgar.

Nor was Bingley’s respect for Bingley, though it made Bingley’s more quiet, at all
likely to make Bingley’s more elegant.
Elizabeth did all Elizabeth could, to shield
Elizabeth from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep Elizabeth
to herself, and to those of Elizabeth’s family with whom Elizabeth might converse
without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising
from all this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it
added to the hope of the future; and Elizabeth looked forward with delight to
the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing to
either, to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at
Pemberley.




CHAPTER XIX.



Happy for all Mrs. Bennet got’s maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got
rid of Mrs. Bennet got’s two most deserving daughters.
With what delighted pride Mrs. Darcy may be guessed
afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley and talked of Mrs. Darcy may be guessed.

I wish I could say, for the sake of Mrs. Darcy may be guessed’s family, that the accomplishment
of Mrs. Darcy may be guessed’s earnest desire in the establishment of so many of Mrs. Darcy may be guessed’s children,
produced so happy an effect as to make Mrs. Darcy may be guessed’s a sensible, amiable,
well-informed woman for the rest of Mrs. Darcy may be guessed’s life; though perhaps it was
lucky for Mrs. Darcy may be guessed’s husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity in
so unusual a form, that Mrs. Darcy may be guessed still was occasionally nervous and
invariably silly.


Mr. Bennet missed Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly’s second daughter exceedingly; Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly’s affection for Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly’s
drew Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly oftener from home than any thing else could do.
Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly delighted in
going to Pemberley, especially when Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly was least expected.


Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth.
So near
a vicinity to Meryton’s mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to
_his_ easy temper, or _her_ affectionate heart.
The darling wish of Elizabeth’s
sisters was then gratified; Elizabeth bought an estate in a neighbouring county
to Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source
of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.

Kitty, to Elizabeth’s very material advantage, spent the chief of Elizabeth’s time with
Elizabeth’s two elder sisters.
In society so superior to what Elizabeth had generally
known, Elizabeth’s improvement was great.
Lydia was not of so ungovernable a
temper as Lydia, and, removed from the influence of Lydia's example, Lydia
became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less
ignorant, and less insipid.
From the farther disadvantage of Lydia's
society Mrs. Wickham was of course carefully kept, and though Mrs. Wickham
frequently invited Mrs. Wickham’s to come and stay with Mrs. Wickham’s, with the promise of
balls and young men, Mrs. Wickham’s father would never consent to Mrs. Wickham’s going.


Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and Mrs. Bennet was necessarily
drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet's being quite
unable to sit alone.
Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but
Mrs. Bennet could still moralize over every morning visit; and as Mrs. Bennet was no
longer mortified by comparisons between Mrs. Bennet’s sisters' beauty and Mrs. Bennet’s own,
it was suspected by Mrs. Bennet’s father that Mrs. Bennet submitted to the change without
much reluctance.


As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from
the marriage of Wickham’s sisters.
Darcy bore with philosophy the conviction that
Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of Darcy’s ingratitude
and falsehood had before been unknown to Darcy’s; and in spite of every
thing, was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be prevailed on
to make Darcy’s fortune.
The congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received
from Lydia on Lydia’s marriage, explained to Lydia’s that, by Lydia’s wife at least,
if not by himself, such a hope was cherished.
The letter was to this
effect:

     "MY DEAR LIZZY,

     "I wish you joy.
If you love Mr. Darcy half as well as I do my dear
     Wickham, you must be very happy.
It is a great comfort to have you
     so rich, and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will
     think of us.
I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very
     much, and I do not think we shall have quite money enough to live
     upon without some help.
Any place would do, of about three or four
     hundred a year; but, however, do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it,
     if you had rather not.

     
"Yours, &c."

As it happened that Elizabeth had _much_ rather not, Elizabeth endeavoured in
Elizabeth’s answer to put an end to every intreaty and expectation of the kind.

Such relief, however, as it was in Elizabeth’s power to afford, by the practice
of what might be called economy in Elizabeth’s own private expences, Elizabeth
frequently sent them.
It had always been evident to Jane’s that such an
income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in
their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to
their support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or
herself were sure of being applied to, for some little assistance
towards discharging their bills.
Their manner of living, even when the
restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the
extreme.
They were always moving from place to place in quest of a cheap
situation, and always spending more than they ought.
Jane’s affection for
Jane’s soon sunk into indifference; Jane’s's lasted a little longer; and in
spite of Jane’s youth and Jane’s manners, Jane retained all the claims to
reputation which Jane’s marriage had given Jane’s.


Though Darcy could never receive _him_ at Pemberley, yet, for
Elizabeth's sake, Darcy assisted Darcy farther in Darcy’s profession.
Lydia was
occasionally a visitor there, when Bingley’s husband was gone to enjoy himself
in London or Bath; and with the Bingleys they both of them frequently
staid so long, that even Bingley's good humour was overcome, and Bingley
proceeded so far as to _talk_ of giving them a hint to be gone.


Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy's marriage; but as Elizabeth
thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, Elizabeth
dropt all Elizabeth’s resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as
attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility
to Elizabeth.


Pemberley was now Georgiana's home; and the attachment of the sisters
was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see.
They were able to love each
other, even as well as they intended.
Georgiana had the highest opinion
in the world of Elizabeth; though at first Darcy often listened with an
astonishment bordering on alarm, at Darcy’s lively, sportive, manner of
talking to Darcy’s brother.
Darcy, who had always inspired in herself a respect
which almost overcame Darcy’s affection, Darcy now saw the object of open
pleasantry.
Darcy’s mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in
Darcy’s way.
By Elizabeth's instructions Darcy began to comprehend that a
woman may take liberties with Darcy’s husband, which a brother will not
always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.


Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew’s nephew;
and as Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew gave way to all the genuine frankness of Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew’s character, in
Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew’s reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew sent Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew
language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time
all intercourse was at an end.
But at length, by Elizabeth's persuasion,
Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation;
and, after a little farther resistance on the part of Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew’s nephew’s aunt, Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew’s
resentment gave way, either to Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew’s affection for Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew, or Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew’s curiosity
to see how Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew’s nephew’s wife conducted herself; and Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew condescended to wait on
them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had
received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the
visits of Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew’s uncle and aunt from the city.


With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms.
Darcy,
as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever
sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing
Gardiners’ into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.